The Project Gutenberg EBook of The History of the 7th Battalion The
Queen's Own Cameron Highlanders, by Col. J. W. Sandilands and Lt. Col. Norman Macleod

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The History of the 7th Battalion The Queen's Own Cameron Highlanders

Author: Col. J. W. Sandilands
        Lt. Col. Norman Macleod

Release Date: October 25, 2015 [EBook #50301]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HISTORY 7TH BATT. CAMERON HIGHLANDERS ***




Produced by Brian Coe, Chris Pinfield, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries)





Transcriber's Note.

Apparent typographical errors have been corrected. Inconsistencies in
hyphenation and in the accenting of French words have been retained.

In the appendix listing officers who served with the battalion, some
entries are out of alphabetical order; while blank spaces indicate
missing dates.

Italics are indicated by _underscores_, small capitals have been
converted to full capitals, and superscripts and a ligature have been
rendered in ordinary font.




 THE HISTORY OF THE 7TH BATTALION
 QUEEN'S OWN CAMERON HIGHLANDERS


 "Lieutenant-Colonel Sandilands of the 7th Camerons arrived on the
 hill. Being the senior officer present, he took command and planted
 the Headquarters flag of his Battalion on the top. It was his
 business to recall the van of the advance, now lost in the fog and
 smoke of the eastern slopes, and to entrench himself on the summit.
 The Redoubt was now out of our hands and the line taken ran just
 under the crest on the west, and was continued North of Loos by the
 46th Brigade. To retire the van was no light task. Two officers whose
 names deserve to be remembered, Major Chrichton of the 10th Gordons,
 and Major Barron of the 7th Camerons, volunteered for the desperate
 mission. They fell in the task, but the order reached the stragglers,
 and they began to fight their way back. In the midst of encircling
 fire it was a forlorn hope, and few returned to the British lines on
 the hill. All down the slopes towards Loos lay the tartans Gordon and
 Black Watch, Seaforth and Cameron, like the drift left on the shore
 when the tide has ebbed."--_John Buchan, in "Nelson's History of the
 War."_


 [Illustration: THE 7th CAMERONS ON HILL 70--25th SEPTEMBER, 1915.
 _From the Painting by Joseph Gray, the property of Evan M. Barron,
 Esq., Inverness._]




 THE HISTORY
 OF THE
 7TH BATTALION QUEEN'S OWN
 CAMERON HIGHLANDERS


 By

 Colonel J. W. SANDILANDS
 C.B., C.M.G., D.S.O.,

 and

 Lieut. Colonel NORMAN MACLEOD
 C.M.G., D.S.O.


 STIRLING:
 ENEAS MACKAY, MURRAY PLACE,
 1922




 Dedicated
 to
 The Mothers

 OF OUR GALLANT COMRADES IN THE 7TH
 BATTALION QUEEN'S OWN CAMERON
 HIGHLANDERS WHO GAVE THEIR
 LIVES FOR THEIR COUNTRY
 AND THE HONOUR OF
 THEIR REGIMENT.




CONTENTS


CHAPTER                                            PAGE

FOREWORD,                                             9

1. EARLY DAYS,                                       17

2. THE BATTLE OF LOOS,                               27

3. HULLOCH-LOOS SECTOR,                              39

4. THE SOMME BATTLE, 1916,                           47

5. BATTLE OF ARRAS, 1917,                            65

6. THE SALIENT, 1917,                                87

7. THE BRITISH WITHDRAWAL, 28/3/18,                 111

8. AMALGAMATION OF 6TH AND 7TH,                     132

9. BUZANCY,                                         139

10. DEMOBILISATION,                                 148

HONOURS AWARDED,                                    157

OFFICERS WHO SERVED WITH THE BATTALION,             161

EXTRACTS FROM WAR DIARY,                            169




ILLUSTRATIONS.


THE 7TH CAMERONS ON HILL 70,           _Frontispiece_

                                                Facing Page

COLONEL J. W. SANDILANDS, C.B., C.M.G., D.S.O.,      40

LIEUT. COLONEL NORMAN MACLEOD, C.M.G., D.S.O.,       80

MONUMENT ERECTED BY THE 17TH FRENCH
DIVISION TO 15TH SCOTTISH DIVISION,                 144




 FOREWORDS.

 BY DIVISIONAL COMMANDERS.

 Lieut.-General Sir F. W. N. M'CRACKEN, K.C.B., D.S.O.
 Major-General H. F. THUILLIER, C.B., C.M.G.
 Major-General H. L. REED, V.C., C.B., C.M.G.


Having commanded the 15th (Scottish) Division for two years and a
quarter, I have followed with deep interest this history of the 7th
Cameron Highlanders.

I am convinced that all who read of the gallant deeds performed by
this Battalion, in company with the other Battalions of the 15th
(Scottish) Division, in the service of their King and Country, will be
stirred with an intense feeling of pride in the achievements of their
countrymen recorded in this little book.

The Battalion has indeed nobly maintained the splendid traditions of
the Queen's Own Cameron Highlanders.

 F. W. N. M'CRACKEN.
 Lieut.-General.

 24/3/22.


This is a great story. A narrative of the adventures in training
camps, in billets and trenches, in battles and in periods of rest, of
one of the units of that splendid body of men known as the "New
Armies" which sprang into being in 1914 under the inspiration of Lord
Kitchener. A story of comradeship, endeavour and sacrifice in the
great cause.

By far the greater part of it deals with the periods of fighting, and
it is doubtful whether any of the New Army units saw more, for the
famous 15th Scottish Division, of which the 7th Camerons formed part,
was one of the earliest of the new divisions to go to the front and
take a place in the line, and its record includes the battles of Loos,
the Somme, Arras 1917, Ypres 1917, the German attack on Arras in 1918,
and the capture of Buzancy in the Soissons area in August 1918, as
part of the 10th French Army under General Mangin.

I had two opportunities during the war of judging the fighting
qualities of the 15th Division. The first was when serving with the
1st Division, which attacked alongside the 15th at Loos. The energy
and enthusiasm with which the Scotsmen prepared for the attack, and
the dash and determination with which they executed it, excited the
highest admiration of their regular comrades of the 1st Division. The
two divisions served in the same Corps for some months in the ensuing
winter, succeeding each other in and out of the water-logged trench
lines of the Loos Salient, and the admiration aroused by their action
in the battle was deepened by the observation of their soldierly
qualities under the trying conditions of trench warfare in winter.

The second time I was a more intimate observer, for I had the supreme
privilege of being appointed to the command of the 15th Division in
June, 1917, just as it was entering the Ypres Salient to take part in
the desperate and bloody fighting of the efforts to capture the
Passchendaele Ridge. Its personnel had largely changed, owing to the
casualties of the Somme and Arras, but the Scottish fighting spirit
was there still, and the dour and stubborn valour with which, after
seizing and holding the Frezenberg Ridge, they essayed again and again
to win the concrete defences of Borry Farm, Beck House, Iberian House,
etc., under indescribable conditions of mud, shell-fire and gas, forms
a story which has not yet been fully told.

In this fighting, as in all the other operations of the Division, the
7th Camerons bore a full and gallant share. The last of the German
efforts to retake the Frezenberg Ridge was broken up by a skilfully
led counter-attack by a company of this Battalion with one of the 8th
Seaforths.

The last time I saw the 7th Camerons was after the return of the
Division to the Arras Sector in September, 1917, when they were
encamped in Blangy Park in the Scarpe Valley. To men who had been
through what they had it was, as the narrator says, a delightful
change and rest. But rest, although more than well earned, was not
accompanied by any slackness or loss of discipline. I was particularly
struck by the state of their camp, its excellent order and
cleanliness; cooking and sanitary arrangements all that they should
be, the men healthy and in good spirits. A rapid recovery after heavy
fighting is a mark of a first-class battalion.

Colonel Norman Macleod had the good fortune to serve with the
Battalion from the day it crossed the Channel till it was amalgamated
with the 6th Camerons in June, 1918 (except a short time when
recovering from wounds). He commanded it for 15 months, and
subsequently commanded the combined 6th/7th Battalion until the end.
It would be a record of which any one might well be proud merely to
have taken part in the great events comprised in that period, but to
have commanded this splendid battalion, and to have been with it from
its first raising in Scotland to its victorious entry into Brussels
after the armistice, during all the period it was gathering its
imperishable laurels and adding lustre to the name of the historic
regiment whose name it bears, is an honour which he probably would not
change for any other, however high.

It is well that such stories should be told. To the survivors of the
events they narrate they are a reminder of great days and great
friendships. To future generations of Scottish lads they will be an
inspiration.

 H. F. THUILLIER,
 Major-General.

 30/5/22.


This modest record of the services of a great battalion in the Great
War adds yet another page to the glorious history of "The Queen's Own"
Cameron Highlanders.

I had the honour to command the 15th (Scottish) Division from October,
1917, to March, 1918. During the first year of that period this
Battalion, or perhaps I should say these Battalions, for the 6th, the
7th and the 6/7th Cameron Highlanders are almost inseparable in my
mind, were most severely tried on many occasions in battle, most
notably in front of Arras in March, 1918, and South of Soissons in
July, 1918.

The authors state that the battle of the 28th March, 1918, was
probably the heaviest fighting in which the 7th Battalion ever took
part. Lieut.-General Sir Charles Fergusson, Commanding the XVII.
Corps, when the great German attack was foreseen, had warned the 15th
Division that it was in a "Post of Honour," adding: "I am glad that it
is in the hands of a Scottish Division, who I know will never let the
enemy pass." Again on the 29th March, after the great attack, General
Fergusson wired: "I knew you could be relied on to stick it out to the
end. There are fresh troops in support of you now, but I want the
honour of holding Arras to be yours alone."

General Ludendorff, in his _Memoirs_, practically attributes the
turning point of his hopes of success to the failure of the 17th
German Army to capture the heights East and North of Arras, this "in
spite of employing a vast amount of artillery and ammunition." I am
sure all comrades of the 15th (Scottish) Division will agree that no
unit of ours deserved more credit for stopping the Germans in front of
Arras than the 7th Cameron Highlanders.

During the period, December, 1918, to March, 1919, the troops were
tried in a different way. A time of absolute inactivity prevailed in
Belgium, with many temptations for all ranks to be slack and to allow
discipline to deteriorate. A natural reaction after the strain of war.
There was also a feeling, rightly or wrongly, that in the system of
demobilisation length of service at the front was not always
considered. During this difficult time the 6/7th Cameron Highlanders
retained their splendid discipline and still upheld their claim to the
nickname "The Shiny Seventh."

The authors refer to their firm belief in the advantages of the kilt
as a service dress. Opinions may differ on this point, but there is no
question as to the prestige and confidence which the kilt carries with
it.

When we moved suddenly to join the Xth French Army in July, 1918, the
British troops were, for some reason, temporarily out of favour in
that area, but the sight of the Highlanders, and the sound of the
bagpipes, changed this feeling at once, and nothing could have
exceeded the enthusiasm with which the 15th Division was received in
billets during this period of operations.

Again, on the coldest of days in January, 1919, when troops of three
Divisions marched past His Majesty, the King of the Belgians, in
Brussels, there was a sudden roar of applause from the half-frozen
crowd as the kilted pipers leading the 45th Infantry Brigade, which
represented the infantry of the 15th Division, approached. The 6/7th
Cameron Highlanders swung past; His Majesty turned to me and said:
"Truly magnificent soldiers." Those who read this narrative will agree
that this splendid tribute was deserved.


 H. L. REED,
 Major-General.

 2/4/22.




CHAPTER 1.

EARLY DAYS.


Soon after the outbreak of the Great War, Colonel D. W. Cameron of
Lochiel received permission to raise Service Battalions of the Cameron
Highlanders under Lord Kitchener's New Army Scheme. He proceeded at
once to Scotland, and at meetings in Glasgow and Inverness stirring
appeals for recruits for the new Battalions were made. These appeals
met with so enthusiastic a response that within a week or two the 5th
and 6th Battalions were raised, and recruiting for the 7th Battalion
was in full swing. Recruits for the 5th and 6th were sent direct to
Aldershot, but when it was found that there was every prospect of
raising another Battalion, it was decided to make its Headquarters at
Inverness, the Capital of the Territorial District of the Cameron
Highlanders.

From the outset, Major Seymour Clarke of the Cameron Highlanders, who
had returned to duty at the Cameron Depot at Inverness on the outbreak
of war, took a great interest in the Battalion, and he did much for it
during its early days in Inverness. On 8th October, 1914,
Lieutenant-Colonel D. P. Haig, who formerly commanded the 3rd
Battalion, was gazetted as the first Commanding Officer of the 7th,
but the date of the birth of the Battalion may be said to be 28th
September, 1914, on which day Captain James Barron, Captain
Mackenzie-Gillanders, and Lieutenant W. H. Kirkland were gazetted to
the Battalion. On 30th September, Captain C. D. Stewart, and on 5th
October, Captain Norman Macleod, were also gazetted. Unfortunately,
Captain Mackenzie-Gillanders and Captain C. D. Stewart were very
shortly afterwards invalided out of the service, and for several weeks
the Battalion had to carry on with Lieutenant-Colonel Haig and
Captains Barron and Macleod as the only senior officers. Captain
Barron acted as Adjutant of the Battalion until shortly before it went
to France, where he fell at the Battle of Loos while Second in
Command; Captain Macleod served with the Battalion throughout most of
the War, commanding it for the last 18 months of its existence, and
Lieutenant Kirkland fell while commanding a Company at Loos.

The two months spent by the Battalion at Inverness were very strenuous
but very happy. It was soon recruited up to full strength, and the
type of man it attracted was of a particularly high order and fine
physique, as at this time the height and chest measurement for
recruits had been increased. A large proportion were students and
young professional men from Glasgow, where a Cameron Recruiting Office
had been opened as soon as Lochiel received permission to raise the
new Battalions, and it was a rule that no man was admitted unless he
was a Scotsman. A considerable number of recruits also came from
Inverness-shire, including not a few from the town of Inverness, where
the Battalion was immensely popular. The Cameron Barracks were, of
course, too small to accommodate more than a small proportion of the
Battalion, but quarters were found for many in a distillery hard by.
Here the comforts of life were lacking, many men having to sleep on a
stone floor with only one blanket, but so fine was the spirit of the
men that there was little or no grousing. The good people of
Inverness, too, vied with one another in doing everything possible for
all ranks. The hospitality extended to officers and men alike was
unbounded, and many citizens earned the undying gratitude of the
Battalion by placing their private baths at their disposal. Moreover,
nearly all the halls in the town were formed into Clubs for the use of
the men, and in these refreshments were dispensed in right royal
fashion. No man who served with the Battalion during these two months
is ever likely to forget the porridge and milk, which, in response to
a well-nigh universal demand, came to be regarded as the _piece de
resistance_ on these occasions.

The first route march of the Battalion was, appropriately enough, to
Culloden Moor. Then, and for several months thereafter, the men were
in civilian clothes: but as time went on (so great was the keenness to
wear the kilt) many members supplied themselves with the Cameron
Service Dress at their own expense. By and by week-end leave was
granted, but no 7th Cameron wanted to go on leave in "civvies." Few
kilts were available at that time, even for those who were eager and
willing to buy them, but there was, happily, a nucleus of Regulars at
the Barracks who boasted the coveted garb. A tentative suggestion that
these proud wearers of the kilt might perchance hire them out to their
New Army brethren who were going on leave, met with a ready
acquiescence, and so rapidly did the idea catch on that kilts were
often booked for weeks ahead. But if a Cameron Highlander is
incomplete without a kilt, so is a Cameron Battalion without a Pipe
Band. Fortunately, one of the band boys at the Barracks, the son of an
old Pipe-Major, was able to play the pipes, and he proudly strutted in
front of the Battalion on its first route march to Culloden Moor.
Before long other pipers were discovered among the recruits, and the
time the Battalion left Inverness it could boast quite a respectable
Pipe Band.

On 30th November the Battalion left Inverness for Aldershot. It was
with many regrets that it said farewell to the "Capital of the
Highlands," where it had been so kindly treated, and where the men had
won golden opinions by their behaviour and discipline. In a farewell
letter to Colonel Haig the Provost expressed the feeling of the
citizens in the following terms:--

 "The men of the Battalion have by their exemplary conduct, and their
 manly and courteous bearing, won favour on all hands, and it is with
 regret we realise that we are no longer going to have them in our
 midst."

The Battalion arrived at Aldershot 1136 strong, and were quartered in
the Salamanca Barracks, which they shared with another Battalion of
the same strength, and where they remained for several weeks. An
unsolicited testimonial was given to the physique of the Battalion by
an Instructor of the 5th Camerons, who saw them march into Aldershot.
He declared that they were one of the finest bodies of men,
physically, he had ever seen. At Aldershot a period of intensive
training was put in, and the Battalion benefited greatly from the
ministrations of Captain Crooks, a splendid instructor and
disciplinarian, who voluntarily placed his services at its disposal.

Christmas and New Year were spent at Aldershot. On 15th January, 1915,
the Battalion marched into billets at Liphook. The long march was
completed in full kit without a single man falling out.

Here Major Norman MacLeod was posted to the Battalion. He had served
in the Calcutta Light Horse, and for some time had acted as Musketry
Instructor to the Brigade.

About this time the Battalion received its first consignment of kilts,
although, as we have indicated, many of the men had already bought the
full uniform privately. Owing to the difficulty of getting the
different tartans and keeping up a supply in France, the War Office
introduced an article called the "universal kilt." It was made of
grey-brown cloth, pleated and sewn on to a waist-band of the same
material like a girl's skirt. It incorporated all the disadvantages of
a kilt without any of the advantages. Luckily this monstrosity was
soon killed by the Highland Societies.

On 22nd February the 15th Division was inspected on Frensham Common by
a distinguished French visitor under the most depressing weather
conditions, as it snowed and rained alternately throughout the day.

The Battalion left Liphook and arrived at Cirencester on the 25th
February. The men were practically all billeted in private houses, and
never were they more happy and fit than in this fine old town. Who
will ever forget the splendid deer park, with its beautiful woods and
long, broad grass rides? But the kindness of the people themselves
will always be uppermost in our minds. Another unique experience we
must record, as it betokens a large-minded tolerance, which is to be
the more appreciated and acknowledged because of its rarity even in
these times. The two Scottish Battalions could find no place large
enough for Divine Service, so the Authorities of the Church of England
were approached, and leave was granted for 1200 men to worship in the
beautiful old Parish Church. They had their own Presbyterian service
under their own Presbyterian chaplain, and the organist led the praise
with the old psalm tunes which Scotsmen love so dearly. Had the grand
old church, with its lofty pillars, clerestory roof, and walls
enshrined with memorial tablets and coats of arms, ever echoed before
to such a service, so impressive and unique? Not since the days of
Cromwell's Iron Rule, if even then, can the preacher have seen from
the pulpit such a sea of manly faces and a sight so inspiring in its
character and its associations.

About 8 miles out from Cirencester was the training area, to which we
used to march in the morning and return about 4 o'clock in the
afternoon, very often to fall in again about 9 or 10 p.m. for night
operations. The men were now so fit that, although they had had a
strenuous day, they would simply race home the 8 miles at night,
singing and chaffing their comrades in front in order to urge on the
pace. On 6th April the Battalion left Cirencester for Chiseldon, which
was a large hutted camp on Salisbury Plain.

Lieut.-Colonel Haig, on the 22nd April, received the appointment of
Commandant of the Staff Musketry Camp at Barry, Lieut.-Colonel J. W.
Sandilands, D.S.O., taking over command the same day. It was with
great regret that the Battalion parted with Colonel Haig. He was a
thorough gentleman and sportsman, and no officer could have been found
better suited for the arduous work of handling a Battalion raised
under such peculiar circumstances. Lieut.-Colonel J. W. Sandilands had
the advantage of having already been out at the Front, where he had
commanded a Company in the 1st Battalion, and also the London
Scottish. Just previous to his taking over the 7th Battalion, he had
been employed as Brigade Major in the 46th Brigade of the 15th
Division.

At Chiseldon the Battalion worked strenuously, and were put through
their musketry course. On 12th May they marched to Park House, which
was a very similar camp to Chiseldon. On 15th May the Brigade marched
past Lord Kitchener, who stated that it was the finest, from a
physical point of view, which he had yet seen. On 3rd June the
Battalion won the 44th Brigade Championship in Highland Games, for
which a silver bugle was presented by Brigadier-General M. Grant
Wilkinson, M.V.O. This bugle has, along with many other prizes, since
been presented to the Depot Cameron Highlanders.

On Sunday, 4th July, orders were received to proceed overseas. This
news was the cause of the greatest enthusiasm amongst the men, who
were eager to give practical proof of the value of their training. On
8th July the Battalion embarked on S.S. "_Arundel_" at Folkestone for
Boulogne, and was entrained for Houle, where a few days were spent.
From Houle it marched to Houchin, the men's feet suffering
considerably from new boots and the paved roads. From Houchin we
proceeded to Les Brèbis as a detached Battalion, and can therefore
claim to be the first Battalion of the 15th Division to enter the
shelled area on the Western front.

Les Brebis was being constantly shelled. It was found almost
impossible to keep the men in their billets, as, being much interested
in this new experience, they would rush into the streets whenever a
shell burst, in order to see the effect, and to collect fragments as
souvenirs. They very soon got tired of this habit.

On 21st July Lieut.-Colonel M'Dougall of Lunga, who commanded the 10th
Gordon Highlanders, was killed while making a tour of the trenches. He
was buried at Houchin with full Military Honours. Colonel M'Dougall
was a splendid type of Highland officer and gentleman, and was the
first officer casualty in the Division.

On the night of the 2/3rd August we took over the trenches for the
first time at Maroc, holding the extreme right of the British line.
Opposite to us were the now famous Towers of Loos, from which the
enemy had good observation over our whole system. The Battalion while
in reserve in this sector was billeted in Mazingarbe. While there a
Church Parade was held in the grounds of the Chateau, which belonged
to a rich mine owner of the district. This, although within range of
the enemy's guns, was most beautifully laid out with masses of flowers
and lovely lawns, through which a burn ran with cascades and pools in
which gold fish sported. The owner resided here during the whole War,
and when the Battalion returned in 1918 they found the garden as
beautiful as ever.

On the 30th August we proceeded to Noeux-les-Mines. On return to the
line the Battalion sustained its first officer casualties. On the 9th
September, Lieuts. W. G. Stuart, MacDonell, and MacRae were wounded by
trench mortars. Three days later rather serious casualties were caused
by the enemy bombarding a saphead which we held.

On the 12th the Battalion was relieved, and went into billets at
Verquin. The pipes and drums played "Retreat" each evening in the
grounds of the mansion house, and also played in Bethune on the
afternoon of the 19th. On the 18th the 4th Battalion marched through
Verquin on its way to the trenches, and was given a very hearty
reception by the 7th Battalion, the band playing them through the
village.




CHAPTER II.

THE BATTLE OF LOOS.


On the 21st we again went into the trenches, taking over the
Grenay-Vermelles line, preparatory to the Battle of Loos. Shelling had
now become intense, the bombardment being in full swing. Before going
into the line the fact that the attack was going to take place was
kept most secret, nobody below the rank of Company Commander being
informed of the project. We were, therefore, somewhat surprised to
learn, on getting into the line, that the Germans knew all about it.
In fact we were told by those in the front line that the enemy was
shouting across to our trenches asking what was the cause of the delay!

At 4.45 a.m. on the 25th the Battalion moved out to take part in its
first great battle, a battle which is one of the greatest in the
history of Scotland, owing to the number of Scottish troops employed.
On that day there were five battalions of Camerons engaged. The
morning was dull and misty, with practically no wind. At 5.50 a.m. our
gas was turned on, and ran alternately with smoke candles. Owing to
the lack of wind, however, it is doubtful if the gas did not do more
harm than good, numerous British casualties being due to it. At 6.30
a.m. the assault was delivered, the 9th Black Watch and 8th Seaforths
leading, with the 7th Camerons in support, and the 10th Gordons in
reserve. The advance was practically due East towards the Towers of
Loos, these being kept slightly on our right. Within a very short time
the Black Watch and Seaforths got clear away.

The Camerons, following, were very shortly streaming through the
village of Loos, having crossed the third German line of wire and
trenches, which had been regarded as impregnable. Unfortunately,
traces of the gallant part played by the Camerons in cutting this
wire, which was almost untouched by Artillery fire, were too evident,
the ground being strewn with dead and wounded. The houses in Loos were
practically battered to pieces. Germans were being bombed out of the
cellars, others bayoneted, dozens were surrendering, but nothing
seemed to stay the advance of the 44th Brigade.

The Battalion Headquarters were established in a red brick building
near the church, which was now a heap of ruins. There the Commanding
Officer, with the Signallers and Scouts collected round him, remained
in comparative security until suddenly a number of the heaviest type
of high explosive shells rained down on them. All dashed for a cellar,
in which was found a German soldier. Soon after it was decided to go
down into the lower cellar, where we found a German officer still
telephoning. It was evident that he had directed the Artillery fire
upon our Headquarters. His telephone apparatus was for a long time
afterwards in the possession of, and used by, the Battalion Signallers.

As the Commanding Officer was going through the village he came across
two Companies of the 7th Royal Scots Fusiliers, who attached
themselves to him, and all went on together to Hill 70. On their
arrival at the foot of the Hill, information was received that 300/400
of the Brigade--most of them Camerons--had pressed forward over the
Hill and were heavily engaged with the enemy's lines at St. Laurent.
It must be remembered that the orders received before going into
action were that the Battalion was to press on to the Cité St.
Auguste, beside St. Laurent, which was given to them as their final
objective.

Major Crichton of the 10th Gordons handed over the command of the Hill
to Colonel Sandilands, who, at once realising the gravity of the
situation, decided to establish a line on the reverse slope of Hill
70. Luckily here there was a sort of natural line of defence,
consisting of a bank about 3 feet high, running roughly North and
South along the Hill. This proved an invaluable feature to hold on to,
as men instinctively rallied to it. Major Barron, 2nd in command, 7th
Camerons, and Major Crichton (10th Gordons) volunteered to go forward
and order the advance party, who had charged over the Hill, to retire.
Both officers fell in the task, but their orders reached the advanced
line, and the men began to fight their way back. Major Crichton was
killed outright, while Major Barron, who was wounded and taken
prisoner, died of his wounds in a German Field Hospital.

The Commanding Officer being satisfied that his right was protected by
the London Regiment which was astride the Loos Crassier, ordered the
Royal Scots Fusiliers to dig in for all they were worth. There is
little doubt that if these two Companies had not acted contrary to the
strict letter of their orders, in coming on with Colonel Sandilands,
things might have gone badly with the 15th Division. About 8 a.m. the
Battalion Flag, which consisted of one of the Divisional yellow
distinguishing flags, with a patch of Cameron tartan taken from an old
kilt sewn on to it, was planted on Hill 70, and remained flying till
midnight, when we withdrew. Throughout the operations the flag was
carried by Scout-Sergeant Lamb, and on more than one critical occasion
he rallied men of all regiments by waving them back to the Hill. This
flag has been presented to the Depot, and is now in the Officers' Mess
at Inverness. About midnight, when the line had been fairly well dug,
those in front were ordered to retire. It was on the forward slope of
Hill 70 that the greatest number of casualties in the 7th Camerons
occurred. The confusion which of necessity arises after an assault of
this nature can be realised from the fact that on Hill 70 the
Commanding Officer had under his command representatives from no less
than nine different Battalions.

At 3 p.m. all were cheered by seeing large bodies of troops coming
over the Hill, apparently to relieve us. They turned out to be part of
the 1st Division, who had been delayed in the attack on our left, and
not a relief. At 6 p.m. word was received that we were to be relieved
by the 62nd Brigade, but owing to some error they did not arrive until
early next morning.

At 8 p.m. the Commanding Officer discussed the situation with the
Brigadier, and satisfied him that the position on Hill 70 was secure
for the night, and, in view of the fact that the few Camerons who
still remained could not influence the situation, received orders to
hand over the command to Lieut.-Colonel M'Lean of the 10th Royal
Scots, and to withdraw his own men. At midnight he ordered his little
band of weary Camerons to retire. Not many who came out that night
will very readily forget it. In drenching rain, pools of mud, and
incessant shelling, they picked their way amongst the dead by the
light of burning houses, and they plodded wearily on, powerless to
take any notice of the wounded who lay waiting for stretcher-bearers.
Mistaking the road, they made a detour through Maroc, finally fetching
up at the old Headquarters, which, although it consisted merely of a
badly shelled house, appeared like a sanctuary. Without calling a
proper Roll the men were numbered off, and it was found that there
were 4 officers and 75 other ranks present out of 20 officers and 827
rank and file who had started off so proudly 24 hours earlier.
Throughout the night and early morning stragglers kept coming in, and
there were finally collected 6 officers and about 290 other ranks.

Philosophe was reached about 3 a.m., and we were lucky to find the
cookers waiting for us, and, after having some tea, both officers and
men slept on the ground, too exhausted to take any notice of the mud
or water. The usual rumours of going back for a long rest were
prevalent, a rest which was often talked about but never matured.
However, about 8 a.m. 26th September, a Staff Officer came over and
said that the battle was going far from well, and that there was no
alternative but to send the remnant of the Battalion back into the
fight. It is impossible to realise the feelings of men under such
circumstances. They fell in, and went straight back, picking their way
through Quality Street, which by this time was literally running with
blood and blocked with wounded. On they went amidst a hail of gas
shells, pushing their way through bunches of disorganised troops--raw
recruits who had never before experienced the sights of a battlefield,
and arriving finally at the old German front-line, where they found
the trench so full of gas that they had to dig themselves in behind
the parados. They held this position well on into the Monday morning,
when they were finally relieved. Twenty-four hours after this these
men marched out of Mazingarbe, headed by the pipes and drums, with
their buttons cleaned and their equipment polished in so smart a
manner that they were mistaken for a new draft, and were greeted with
shouts from those whom they passed: "Wait till you have been in the
trenches, and you won't look like that."

Our casualties for the day were:--

  OFFICERS.           MEN.

 Killed,    4      Killed,     64
 Wounded,   6      Wounded,   255
 Missing,   4      Missing,   215
           --                 ---
           14                 534

 Total,  548.

Colonel Sandilands received the following letter from Colonel The
Mackintosh of Mackintosh:--

"INVERGORDON, _12th October, 1915_.

"DEAR SANDILANDS,

"Let me express the feelings of all here. We are proud of the dash and
gallantry shewn by the 7th Battalion Cameron Highlanders under your
command at the taking of Hill 70 at the Battle of Loos. To command
such officers and men is indeed enviable--they have added fresh glory
to the Cameron Highlanders, and their deeds will live in history.

"From my son, who was A.D.C. to General Sir Arthur Paget, Commanding
the Salisbury Division, I heard what Field Marshal Lord Kitchener said
about the 7th Battalion: 'It is far the finest Battalion of the new
Army I have seen,' no mean compliment from such an authority who knows
how to judge soldiers.

"Yours truly,

"A. MACKINTOSH OF MACKINTOSH, Colonel,

"3rd Cameron Highlanders."

The next three days were spent in the support line, which was not very
much more comfortable, but distinctly safer. The following three days
we had a bad time. The rain came down in torrents during the relief,
and continued incessantly for 40 hours. It is very difficult even to
imagine the misery and discomfort which the men suffered. The
so-called trenches were full of water and mud up to the men's knees.
It was almost impossible for the ration and water parties to get
either up or down.

During the second afternoon of this downpour the German Artillery got
on to our front line trench, blew in a machine-gun emplacement and
knocked down a considerable portion of the parapet, one man being
killed and two wounded. The parapet was rebuilt during the night. Next
morning nothing particular happened, but in the afternoon the German
guns again opened a heavy enfilade fire, resulting in 11 men being
killed and 21 wounded, and the parapet being very badly knocked about.
It was a very trying experience for new troops, and there is little
doubt that the Battalion deserved great credit for taking their
punishment so well.

The following day we were relieved, and went back into the support
trenches, and finally marched back to Noeux-les-Mines on 7th November.
On 17th November Major R. B. C. Raban joined the Battalion as Second
in Command. Christmas and New Year were celebrated at Allouagne, and
here too was held a Divisional Boxing Exhibition, the principal event
being an exciting 10 rounds fight between Private O'Rourke of the
Camerons, and Sergt. Macleod of the Seaforths, the latter winning.

On the 14th January, 1916, the Battalion returned to the trenches,
taking over section 14 bis on Hill 70. During this tour there was
attached to us "C" Company of the 6th Royal Irish Regiment for
instruction. Mining operations had now started in earnest, and this
involved heavy trench mortar and shell fire, causing numerous
casualties. It was during this tour of duty that we found and buried
the body of Lieut.-Colonel A. F. Douglas Hamilton, V.C. He was lying
just where he had been killed, and, although it was remarkable that
his body had not been discovered before, yet it was a source of
satisfaction to all that he should have finally been buried by the
officers and men of the Regiment in which he had served, and of which
he was so proud. On the 23rd March "B" Company proceeded to
Labuissiere for duty at 1st Corps Headquarters. The Battalion was to
have been inspected by the Commander of the 1st Corps on the 24th
March, but owing to snow it was cancelled. Next day we railed to
Lillers, and marched to billets in Allouagne. On the 3rd April Major
R. Raban left, on being appointed to the Command of the 13th Royal
Scots, and was therefore struck off the strength.

On the 13th April Colonel Sandilands relinquished the Command of the
Battalion on being promoted Brigadier-General Commanding the 104th
Infantry Brigade. He was given a great send off by the officers and
men of the Battalion, who lined the street of Allouagne in his honour.

The following article, which was written by Colonel Sandilands as a
brief review of the period during which he commanded the Battalion,
appeared in the April Number of _The 79th News_, 1916:--

 A YEAR'S COMMAND.

 It is now just a year since I took over command of the 7th Battalion,
 but in some ways it seems like ten years since I arrived at Chiseldon.

 Out of the 1000 men serving then, how many are there still with us in
 the trenches?

 Whatever officers and men there may be, must recall at times the old
 days which we spent so happily together. The training on the Downs,
 the long dusty march to Park House: these are now things of the past.

 As we wade about in mud and water, it seems like a dream to think of
 Tower Hill, where we used to lie amongst the trees, well concealed
 from Generals, and eat our dinners from the cookers, which in those
 days were strange machines of unknown habits.

 The Highland Brigade Championship; the Officers' Riding School; the
 gramophone in the Canteen; the sixpenny novels; Officers Mess garden,
 which never produced a blade of grass; finally, the Sunday when we
 got our orders to go to France, the suppressed excitement of the
 Channel crossing, our triumphant march through Boulogne with pipes
 and drums in full swing--how many of us are still alive who remember
 these days?

 It is amusing now to think of the difficulty we had in taking over
 billets at Houle, and the deadly silence in which we marched from
 Gonnehem, on the night when the regimental dog was lost, with his
 tartan coat and regimental badges.

 How many men are still left from those who rushed out of the houses
 at Brèbis to see the shells bursting, and who dug at Maroc in the
 firm belief that they were exposed to untold dangers? What letters
 used to be written home in those days to fond mothers, describing the
 hardships, the terrific shell fire, and the groans of the dying. No
 doubt these mothers were moved to tears at the thoughts of what their
 sons were suffering, little knowing of the peace and quiet of the
 trenches at Maroc and Quality Street.

 But if the same mothers could have seen their sons in the trenches at
 Hulluch in October, they would have good reason to weep. Liquid mud
 up to one's knees; the parapets consisting of half-buried Germans; a
 perfect hail of shells at intervals throughout the day and night!

 In those days it took me three solid hours to drag myself through the
 mud and water on my morning round of perhaps 2 miles. Officers and
 men alike were caked with mud.

 What an afternoon that was when the parapet was blown in and we lost
 12 killed and 25 wounded in a few minutes! I shall never forget
 seeing boys who might well have been still at school, pinched with
 hunger and cold, sitting crouched under a waterproof sheet, fumbling
 with their frozen fingers, trying to open a letter from home. This
 letter was probably their one gleam of light in their horrible
 surroundings; and yet they never complained, but stuck to it like
 Camerons. I used to curse in my heart the loafers at home who ought
 to have been out here, instead of leaving it to lads who never should
 have been exposed to a winter in the trenches.

 Who is there left in the Battalion that used to come to the garden at
 Verquin to listen to the drums and pipes playing Retreat, in the days
 when we first began to know that we were to take part in one of the
 greatest battles of the age?

 The little broken-down house, which was the Battalion Headquarters at
 Philosophe the night before Loos, is still there. Quality Street,
 instead of being a peaceful little village where one lived in
 comparative safety, is now battered every day by German shells.

 How many men are there still in the ranks who clambered over the
 parapet on the 25th, and joined in that mad rush which struck terror
 into the Bavarian regiments who were up against us? I do not suppose
 that in any case there can be many who have a clear recollection of
 what actually did happen in the charge, or on that fateful afternoon
 when the remnant of the 44th Brigade hung on to Hill 70, silent and
 grim in their determination to hold the Hill for Scotland. The bank
 behind which we first began to dig is still there, and easily
 recognised, just between the firing and support line.

 What a weary little party returned to Philosophe that night! What a
 shambles Quality Street was next morning when we went back through it
 to hold the old German line.

 Even Christmas at Allouagne, the concerts in the Recreation Room, and
 the boxing in the Hospital yard, are beginning to fade away in the
 distance.

 Although we have recently been lucky, yet there are many of our
 comrades who marched off from Noeux-les-Mines in January, but will
 never answer their names again at Roll Call. Some have been buried at
 Loos, within a few yards of where we fought on the 25th, and some
 have been buried in the trenches.

 I often wonder whether the men of the Battalion realise the link that
 is being formed amongst us. Do they realise, when the war is over,
 the longing to see some of their old officers again will be such as
 to defy description? Do they realise that little acts of
 unselfishness and kindness, performed every day in the trenches, will
 be amongst their most treasured remembrances, no matter whether they
 go out into the world or return to a life of ease and comfort? Then
 it may be that for the first time the old saying, "Once a Cameron
 always a Cameron," will come home to them in its full intensity.

 J. W. S.

 29/2/1916.




CHAPTER 3.

HULLUCH LOOS SECTOR.


On the 26th April the Battalion returned to the trenches under the
command of Major T. L. Cunningham, relieving the 7th Royal Sussex
Regiment in the Quarry Sector. By this time the mining operations had
made the front line into a series of craters, and the shelling of the
enemy had become increasingly severe. The following day the R.E. blew
up the right leg of "Hairpin." We lost several men in the bombardment
which followed, the usual practice after exploding a mine being that
the enemy would start firing trench mortars, which would be replied to
by our field guns, the enemy in return firing his whizzbangs and
howitzers on our front line system. The 4th of May saw 3 more mines
exploded in the Hairpin crater, after which our bombers advanced to
secure the lip of the crater. The enemy counter-attacked, and a very
severe fight took place between our bombers and the enemy, in which we
finally drove him back to his original position, while we held the
crater. After the attack the enemy gave our trenches a long and severe
bombardment, which caused many casualties.

The Battalion was relieved on the 11th May by the 7th K.O.S.B.'s, and
proceeded to La Bourse in Divisional Reserve. Here the men enjoyed
good baths, the time being filled up with odd parades and finding the
inevitable working parties for the front line of trenches. On the 13th
May Major C. H. Marsh, D.S.O., of the 18th Lancers, who had lately
commanded the 7th K.O.S.B.'s, took over command of the Battalion from
Major Cunningham, who had been in command since the departure of
Brigadier-General Sandilands.

 [Illustration: Colonel J. W. SANDILANDS, C.B., C.M.G., D.S.O.,
 commanded from 22nd April, 1915, to 13th April, 1916.]

On the 14th May the Battalion was put under the orders of the 46th
Brigade, and on the 19th relieved the A. and S. H. in the left
sub-sector of the "Hohenzollern." Mining operations were still in full
swing, the enemy exploding a mine near "Argyll Sap," which filled in
the "Hogs Back" and part of "Northumberland Trench." It was a complete
surprise, and many men were buried and injured by the falling debris,
"C" Company suffering the worst, there being 3 killed and 45 wounded.
The Battalion was to have been relieved that night, but the relief had
to be postponed in order that the saps and trenches might be cleared
before handing over. About the 22nd May everyone began to expect a
Boche attack, as the Intelligence Reports constantly contained
references to large enemy working-parties and abnormal transport
movements. In one instance as many as 5,000 men were reported as being
seen moving in our direction. Two prisoners were also taken, who
confirmed the report that the enemy intended attacking and using gas.
Apparently our counter-action proved effective, as no attack ever took
place.

On the 28th June, in the right sub-sector of the "Hohenzollern," 4
patrols from "C" and "D" Companies, under the commands of
Second-Lieuts. Drew, Goudie, Currie and M'Crostie, attempted to raid
the enemy's lines after a discharge of gas. Three of the patrols found
the wire uncut and the trench strongly held by the enemy. "A Bangalore
Torpedo," which was to be used to cut the wire, was unfortunately hit
in the trench, and, exploding as the raiders were getting into
position, killed the men who were carrying it. The fourth patrol,
however, under Lieut. Goudie, succeeded in reaching the enemy's front
line. This they bombed, and then returned to our own lines. One of the
patrol being killed, Lieut. Goudie, Sergeant Small, and Private Heely
tried to bring back the body, but had to abandon the attempt owing to
the enemy's heavy machine gun fire. The total casualties were 9 men
killed and 19 other casualties.

On the 18th July our Engineers blew up "Border Redoubt" at the
junctions of "Riflemen's Alley" and "Alexandria Trench." Instructions
had been given that after the explosion the far lip of the crater was
to be consolidated. This proved a difficult job, but we were ordered
to persevere with it. The explosion formed two craters, which were
heavily bombarded with rifle grenades and aerial darts by the enemy,
who evidently had no intention of trying to consolidate the crater
himself. Three different attempts were made to get into the further
crater, and within a few seconds, on each occasion, every man was a
casualty, as the whole movement was under observation of the enemy.
However, after many hours arduous work, lying flat on the stomach and
scraping with an entrenching tool, a trench of sorts sufficient to
hold the far lip of the crater was formed. The work was arduous and
trying, as well as dangerous, but the officers and men stuck to it
bravely. The following afternoon a Staff Officer came up with
beautifully drawn plans for consolidating the near lip of the craters,
a scheme which, if originally carried out, would have saved many lives.

 CASUALTIES.

 Killed,     1 Officer and 16 other ranks.
 Wounded,    4 Officers and 12 other ranks.

Amongst the wounded was Major Cunningham, who had been with the
Battalion since it came to France in 1915, and who had commanded the
Battalion from the time General Sandilands left until Colonel Marsh
was appointed. He was a good officer, a fearless man, and liked by all.

On 22nd July the Battalion was relieved by the Royal Berkshire
Regiment, and proceeded to Houchin. It was not realised at the time
that we were leaving this area for good, but as it turned out we were
not to return again to Hulluch-Loos sector until practically the end
of the war. The men were glad to get away from a sector where all the
worst modern appliances of war were used in abundance. Here they had
spent their first winter, and fought their first great battle, and the
names of Hulluch Alley, Gordon Alley, etc., will be imprinted in their
memories for many a day. These long communication trenches were nearly
always half-full of muddy water, but, luckily, as we were wearing
kilts, it was an easy matter to either lift them up or to take them
off, hang them round the shoulders, and by this means arrive
comparatively dry in the front line, which was not the fate of the
trousered Battalions. When going into the line these Battalions were
soaking wet before they arrived there, and if coming out, not only
arrived wet at their billets, but had to carry all the extra weight of
the mud, etc., which had saturated into their puttees and trousers--a
thing that told considerably on tired troops marching for several
miles.

It was certainly a very trying sector. There was never a tour without
several casualties from mines, "Flying Pigs," and, especially, aerial
darts, which infernal machines, many were convinced, were covered with
a poisonous paint. We shall hazard no opinion on this point, but it is
curious to note that many a man who only received the slightest wounds
from them died from the effects. The work was exceedingly hard, as the
trenches were constantly being blown in or filled up with debris of
mines and explosives. Working parties had to be found to repair this
damage, as well as to carry the spoil out of the mines. Mine carrying
parties were detailed in 8-hours shifts, every man working one shift
in 24 hours. The work consisted of going down the mine shaft and
carrying up bags of spoil which were then emptied. The carrying of
lumps of chalk in the sand-bags up the stairs became not only sore on
the back, but exceedingly wearisome to the legs. In addition to this
the same men had to be used for trench repairs, carrying parties for
trench stores, rations, etc., so that it can be easily understood that
there was little time for sleep or rest.

In spite of all this, many men were sorry to leave the district where
they had made a number of good friends among the mining villagers in
their billets. Especially did they enjoy a rest in Bethune, where some
of the attractions of the town could be indulged in. They would sooner
have taken the risks and hard work of this area, and get back to
billets which were occupied by women and children, than have enjoyed
the safeness of some of the quieter areas where life was much more
monotonous.

One has often heard grumbles at the French peasant for such things as
making a charge for the use of buckets to draw water with. But when
one learned the number of buckets which were lost a certain sympathy
grew towards the owner. It was surprising how domesticated most of the
men became, helping in the houses and playing with the children, for
Jock is a kind-hearted fellow.

The possibilities for bathing in this area were also good. Many of the
large coal mines had a splendid system of baths at the minehead. The
French miner keeps his clothes at the mine, and when he has done his
day's work there is a good spray bath heated by the exhaust steam
waiting for him. After that he puts on his ordinary clothes, leaving
his working clothes to be dried for the next day. There were also
large wooden towers used for cooling and condensing purposes, the
water dropping from the top into a tank 40 or 50 feet long and about 6
feet deep. These made splendid bathing ponds, where the men were able
to enjoy a swim, even when the weather was inclined to be cold, as the
water was always more or less warm.

"Hutments," such as existed towards the end of the war, had not yet
come into use, so that men were billeted in houses and farms, some
occupied and some not. There were few sadder sights, or one which
brought home the horrors of war, than some of those deserted mining
villages. The once pretty little gardens now buried under the bricks,
mortar, and beams of the shattered houses, through which an odd flower
would force its way, the roses still clinging to the broken garden
railings. Inside the house was strewn with women's clothing,
children's toys, perambulators, etc., pointing out how hurriedly the
once happy home had been sacrificed in order to escape the enemy's
shells, or even greater cruelties, for the Hun was no respecter of
women or children. What anguish of heart these poor women must have
suffered. Hay lofts made good billets, but trouble lay for the unwary,
as there was no floor, the hay being supported on the top of beams. If
the layer of hay was thin through you went. A stout sergeant, while
taking roll call one night, thus suddenly disappeared. Luckily his
fall was broken by landing on the back of a cow sleeping below, much
to its surprise and annoyance.




CHAPTER 4.

THE SOMME BATTLE, 1916.


We now received definite orders that we were to leave the area and to
move in a southerly direction. We were not told where we were going,
but as we knew the Battle of the Somme had started, it was not
difficult to guess. The only point which might have raised any doubt
in our minds was the fact that the men had been worked almost to a
standstill in the sector which we were leaving, and they had been
encouraged to do so by being informed on more than one occasion by the
Higher Command that this activity was the part they were called upon
to play in order to assist in the great attack which was going on
further south. However, we had all become old soldiers by this time,
and therefore quite expected to learn that, in spite of such promises,
it had become necessary to employ us in the battle line, and we set
off cheerfully southwards with the full intention of once more proving
to the Boches what we could do in the lighting line. In fact, many
would have been sorry, in their hearts, had a big battle taken place
without our Battalion having a hand in it. It would have been looked
upon as a reflection on the Battalion that a big fight could possibly
be carried through without our aid!

We started this march on the 23rd July, and proceeded to Dievel, where
we had two days' rest. From there we continued the march through Gouy,
Occoches, Autheux, Maours, Mirvaux and Lahoussoue, arriving near
Albert on the 8th August. This march was one of the most enjoyable
periods which the Battalion spent in France. The weather was extremely
hot, and the marching was done in the early morning, generally
starting an hour or so before dawn, and completing the march by 9 or
10 a.m. This saved us trudging along in the burning heat, and also
allowed the men the remainder of the day for rest or amusement. The
route was well behind the line, through villages which had not been
destroyed. As a rule we were not billeted in the houses, but bivouaced
in fields, if possible beside a river, where the men were able to
bathe and play games. It was noticeable how physique and spirits
improved as the march went on, and by the time we reached Albert we
were all on the top of our form.

At Albert we once more bivouaced in a field on the south side of the
main road, about one mile west of the town. By this time we were quite
experienced at making shelters out of all kinds of odds and ends. When
at Albert we adopted the plan of wearing the smoke-helmet as a
sporran. This was not only a very convenient way of carrying it behind
the lines, but when the satchel was properly washed it also looked
very smart. It was soon possible to realise the severity of the
fighting, as there was abundant evidence of the action which had taken
place over the area. There was hardly a square yard of ground that was
not ploughed up by shell, the whole area being composed of holes of
different sizes. On the 17th we moved forward. As we marched through
Albert we saw that wonderful sight of the statue of the Virgin and
Child which had been on the top of the cathedral tower originally,
but, having been hit by a shell, now stood out at right angles
overlooking the square. The Child, held out at arms length over the
head of the blessed Virgin, appeared to be gazing at and invoking a
blessing on the troops passing below. We were now to take the
switch-line, which formed part of the German system of trenches in
front of Contalmaison. We had previously prepared our jumping-off
trenches, which we left at 8.55 a.m., following strong artillery
barrage. The German front-line was taken without much difficulty, many
of the enemy surrendering. We reached our objective and started
digging in, but the enemy developed a bombing attack from a trench on
our right, and Captain MacRae, along with Lieut. Orr, started
counter-bombing. Our supply of bombs began to give out, but happily
there were large numbers of German bombs lying about, and with these
we were able to do good execution, especially as we found that we
could get a longer range with these than with our own. Luckily, when
we were getting short handed from casualties, we were able to get the
assistance of two platoons of the 9th Gordons to carry bombs from the
rear up to our bombers.

In the meantime it was apparent that, owing to casualties, we were not
sufficiently strong to hold the elbow and force the trench where the
Germans had formed a block. Unfortunately, the Stokes Gun Team had
been put out of action. Lieut. Anderson, who was in charge of the
guns, did magnificent work for a time, feeding and firing the guns
himself while the team were sent away to fetch more ammunition. Our
casualties had now been severe, and it was evidently necessary to form
a further attack to clear the remainder of the trenches if we were to
maintain the ground already won. This was organised with the
assistance of a party of the Seaforth Highlanders who had arrived as a
carrying party. About this time it was noticed that the Germans were
massing near the Martinpuich-Pozieres road, but our artillery soon
brought their fire on to them and broke them up. Our counter-attack
was launched at 5.50 p.m., and was entirely successful.

Our casualties were heavy, 5 officers being killed and 9 wounded,
while among the rank and file 44 were killed, 16 were missing believed
killed, and 167 wounded. For this action we received several
congratulations, that from the G.O.C. 4th Army stating:--

 "Please convey the Army Commander's congratulations to the 15th and
 1st Divisions on their successes and the enterprise they are
 displaying, which is invaluable at this stage of the battle."

We carried on in this area up till the 19th September, when we were
relieved by the 8th Yorks of the 23rd Division, and went back into
Divisional reserve at Framvillers.

Here we remained carrying out training until the 5th October, when we
once more marched up and bivouaced at Beaucourt, going into the front
line on the 11th, which by this time had been advanced as far as Le
Sars. On the 13th October the Regimental Sergeant-Major, A. K. Scott,
D.C.M., was killed. He had joined the Battalion early in 1914, and had
been with it ever since. He was an exceptionally good R.S.M., a strict
disciplinarian, handling those under him with tact, a splendid
organiser for whom no amount of work seemed too much. A brave man and
a born soldier, he was respected and beloved by all who came in
contact with him. The weather now was broken and the ground was
becoming a quagmire, owing to the innumerable shell-holes being full
of water. Our front line consisted of a series of these shell-holes,
which made all movements by day impossible, and at night, owing to the
lack of any sort of landmarks, it was the simplest thing possible to
lose one's way. The reserve positions were at Contal-maison. It was a
long weary march from the front line back to this point, threading
one's way in the dark between the shell-holes. Afterwards there was a
duckboard track, but as it was well known to the enemy it was often
shelled. It was especially hard upon Lewis Gun Teams and Bombers, who
had to carry their supplies of drums and ammunition and bags of bombs.
We tried once or twice leaving our ammunition and taking over the
relieving Battalion's so as to save carrying, but the men always
complained that the ammunition, etc., handed over to them was dirty,
and they would prefer to stick to their own.

It was exhausting enough walking through the mud in ordinary kit, but
the physical exertion became almost unendurable at the end of two or
three hours when a man, in addition to his rifle and 120 rounds, had
to carry a heavy load which caused him to sink deep in the mud at
every step. One was filled with admiration at the pluck and endurance
of the young lads who did it.

It was intended that we should carry out another attack, but, although
the Battalion moved twice up to the line for this purpose, on each
occasion it had to be postponed, as the weather had rendered the
ground impassable. Jumping-off trenches, however, were prepared. On
one occasion, when the attack looked imminent, the Battalion was
brought back into the line, the Brigadier stating that the parties who
had been put on to the work had not been able to make much progress,
and that he felt sure that if we took it on it would be completed.
This nice compliment compensated us for being brought back into the
line before our time, and spurred on the men to finish the task--which
they did.

On the 4th November we once more went into Divisional Reserve at
Bresle. Here we took over a camp which had been kept in splendid
order. Even the tent boards had been thoroughly scrubbed by those
before us, which created in our minds a very favourable impression of
the outgoing Battalion. The camp stood on high ground outside the
village. We were given the choice of being billeted in the village or
occupying the camp, but the advantages of all being together in a
clean place more than compensated for not going into billets which at
the best appeared very dirty. The cold, however, was intense, the
water being frozen solid inside the tent every morning. The officers
rather envied the men sleeping in a crowded tent, as they had a better
chance of being warm. So far, unfortunately, we had only been able to
get one blanket per man. The cold did not, however, affect the men's
health. The way in which health improved even in the trenches when the
frost came was remarkable. No doubt it must have saved the spreading
of infection, as in the line there were still a great many dead lying
unburied, and every shell-hole was full of stagnant water.

We carried out a varied programme of training, being lucky enough to
have a rifle-range close at hand. By this time the Army was once more
realising the advantages of the rifle, which had for some time been
sadly neglected in favour of the bomb, an instrument which is
exceedingly useful in trench warfare where the sap-heads and trenches
are a few yards from each other, but perfectly useless in more or less
open warfare. The average man could not throw a bomb more than 20/30
yards, and at that range it was almost as dangerous to the thrower as
to the enemy. It was extraordinary, however, what a hold it got of the
troops, a large part of even the home training evidently being devoted
to it. Our main object now was to make the men realise that their best
friend was their rifle. There is a story told of one instance where a
man was seen chasing a Boche within 30/40 yards of him in order to try
and get within easy bombing distance! It apparently never struck him
that with his rifle the Boche was a certain target at this distance.

We also had good ground at Bresle for practice in the construction of
strong points. At this time plenty of amusement could always be got by
visiting the officer's riding school, carried on from 7 to 8 in the
morning. The whole day, however, was not devoted merely to
instructional training, part of every afternoon being devoted to
sports, especially football. Even in the hottest weather or after a
long march the men would hardly be in their billets before somebody
had the football out.

The Brigade Games were held here, and everyone went in for all sorts
of training with the object of trying to win the Championship. The
sports were held in the field below our camp on the 21st November, the
Championship events being the 100 yards, the mile, the cross country
race, the long and high jumps, the tug-of-war, putting the weight,
tossing the caber, and football. The points scored were:--

 Gordons,      14
 Black Watch,  14
 Seaforths,    23
 Camerons,     25

So that we, for the third time, won the silver bugle, as the Champions
of the Brigade. The tug-of-war was a most tremendous affair, the final
of which was an all over pull, lasting about 25 minutes. The Camerons'
team in the first period of the pull were over with the exception of
three men, but by degrees they slowly recovered themselves, and
finally, by a sort of cross between a war dance and a quick march,
they pulled the other team over the line. The excitement was intense!
The training for this event was very amusing. On both sides the
trainers were old soldiers who had competed with each other many times
before in India and elsewhere. If either Sergt.-Major while training
his team saw the other approaching, it did not matter how far off, the
training would promptly cease, as they were certain that the opponent
was out to gain tips! Sergt.-Major Vass was responsible for the
splendid training of the winning Cameron team.

While at Bresle we had the honour of being inspected by the G.O.C. in
C., Field Marshal Sir Douglas Haig. He complimented us highly on the
part we had taken in the Battle of the Somme, and expressed himself as
greatly pleased with the appearance of the Battalion.

On the 1st December we moved back once more into Albert, via Laviville
and Millencourt, preparatory to going into the line. While behind the
line we had a strenuous time cleaning and repairing the roads. The
Corps Commander issued a special Order, stating that "He wished to
place on record his great appreciation of the work done by the troops
on the roads, railways, and tramlines during our last six weeks in the
Corps area, and that with the adverse conditions he fully realised the
great amount of extra work which it involved, but trusted that all
ranks would realise how essential the work was in view of future
operations, and, further, for their own welfare."

Moving into "Scots Redoubt," on the 16th, we once more took up our
duty in the front line. By this time trench feet began to appear--a
trouble which always existed during the mud, cold and wet of winter.
It was a satisfaction to know, however, that the Highland Brigade
suffered less in this respect than any other brigade in the Division,
the possible reason being the wearing of hose tops instead of puttees.
When the puttee gets wet it is very apt to shrink and press upon the
leg, interfering with the circulation. The Highlanders, however, were
able to wear two pairs of hose tops, thereby keeping the men's legs
warm without interfering with the circulation, by pressing the feet
into boots when wearing two pairs of socks. They acted the same way as
mittens do for the hands. It is pleasing to realise that the Highland
garb once more proved of value as a fighting kit. In order to prevent
trench feet all men had to rub their feet and legs with whale oil.
This order had to be carried out most strictly, fault always being
found if it was not done.

On one occasion, when some men were in the outpost line for 12
hours--which consisted of a small shell-hole full of water--one of
them developed trench feet on his return. Fault was found because he
had gone 12 hours without oiling his feet, even although he had done
so immediately before going on and coming off duty. On it being
pointed out that it was impossible for a man to go through this
performance while standing in water in an exposed shell-hole, the
reply came back that there was no reason why he should not stand on
one foot, lift the other out of the water, oil it and put it back
again! A performance which no doubt seemed simple to those behind the
lines, but was not so easily carried out in practice. Another point
which was insisted on was trying to get the men to put on dry socks.
Of course it was quite impossible to dry the socks in the line, but
some genius behind the lines was struck with the brilliant idea that
the men should carry a sock in each trouser pocket, which would be an
effective way of drying them. This order was circulated around the
whole of the Highland Brigade, without anybody realising the
difficulty that a man in the kilt would have in finding his trouser
pockets!

No movement could take place near the outpost lines in daylight, which
necessitated the C.O. and others, if they wished to see the outpost
and forward lines, making a tour just before sunrise. Hardly was there
a day that the Brigadier and his staff did not go round these posts,
no matter whether they were deep in mud or snow. There being no
continuous line of trenches, it was the simplest thing to lose one's
way. One morning an officer who had just relieved one of the posts,
bringing with him the rum ration, set out to walk over to the next
post in order to give them their ration. It was a foggy morning with
snow on the ground, and, unfortunately, he missed the post and
wandered on into the German lines, the Battalion thereby losing a very
capable officer and also the rum ration, which from the men in the
post's point of view, was possibly the more serious. The enemy,
however, were apt to do the same, and on more than one occasion we got
German prisoners who had wandered from their own line.

We were unfortunate enough to have to spend Christmas in the front
line, but were relieved on Christmas night, and moved back to Shelter
Wood. It was quite impossible to hold our Christmas and New Year
dinner there, as the camps were hardly more comfortable than the front
line. The mud was indescribable, and it was with the greatest
difficulty that ordinary rations could be got. Thanks to the sea of
mud, it was not possible to distinguish between the points where the
road was solid and where there was a shell hole. It was no uncommon
sight to see a mule team up to their necks in water. Sometimes it even
necessitated the wretched animals being destroyed. One of the senior
officers took it upon himself to try and cope with the mud in the
camp, and was promptly appointed "O.C. Mud!" His system was to cut
trenches into which the mud was pushed by means of a kind of shovel,
then everybody stood along the trench armed with more of these shovels
and kept the mud on the move till it reached the edge of the camp. The
idea was good, but unfortunately mud seemed to be created as quickly
as it was removed, and for those moving about at night these trenches
with their slimy contents were regular traps.

In consequence of the difficulties of transport all stores were very
short, especially coal. One had, therefore, to resort to all kinds of
means in order to get fuel. Luckily, what once had been beautiful
woods were situated near the camp, but now all the trees were smashed
and torn up by artillery. There were strict orders, however, that no
wood should be cut without permission being received from the French
Woods and Forests Department, Paris. The acting C.O. used, therefore,
to sally forth into the wood with a party of men to collect fuel, much
to the fear of the Adjutant, who always expected to see him arrested
for doing so. He, however, calmed his conscience (if that was
necessary) by only removing the fallen timber.

It was our fate to spend Hogmanay of this year once again in the front
line. It was generally expected that the Boches would do something to
celebrate the occasion, but luckily our prophecies proved wrong.

We could look back on the old year 1916, with pride. We had done a lot
of hard work and strenuous fighting. In spite of heavy casualties, the
Battalion was as keen and efficient as ever. Our successes had added
to our _esprit de corps_. We were no longer a new Battalion without a
history. We could now draw inspiration from the feats of arms we had
ourselves accomplished, as well as from that of the old Regiment to
which we were all so proud to belong.

Sometimes one wonders if the ardour of the work, apart from its
discomfort and danger, is fully realised by those who never
experienced it. How often has one heard those at home remark: "Oh,
yes, while you fellows are fighting, we are doing our bit at home--we
have curtailed our holidays, and we don't get away from our work till
6 and 7 at night." Even Staff Officers would impress on you the long
hours they worked, and without doubt most of them did work hard: an
officer at G.H.Q. would be in his office by 9 a.m., and, with the
exception of meal hours and an hour for necessary exercise, he would
not leave his duties till after 10 p.m. While all this is admitted,
yet it would be wrong to imagine that the Regimental Officer did not
also have long hours. Moreover, when his work was done he had no
comfortable bed in which to rest. Even to take one's clothes off was
looked upon as a luxury. It might be of interest, therefore, to put on
record an ordinary day's work of a Company Commander in the line.

During the day he was kept busy with inspecting his line, visits from
Staff Officer, making up returns, answering correspondence, organising
night working parties, indenting for material, and the many other
matters of the daily routine. At night again, when the rations came
up, the C.Q.M.S. would arrive for instructions regarding pay, rations,
detailing of men for leave, courses, etc. After that he had working
parties to visit, sentries to be inspected, examining localities which
could not be visited in daylight, officers coming from patrols to
interview, prepare and write out patrol and other reports which had to
be at Brigade Headquarters before 6 a.m. These are some of the duties
which occupied him during the night. From this it can be realised that
the officer in the line generally got two or three hours sleep at odd
intervals during the night, and with luck another two hours during the
day. And remember that he had to sleep often in a damp shelter or
draughty dug-out in his wet clothes without even a valise to lie on,
many a time with not so much as a blanket to roll round him. When
behind the line in "rest billets" he was more comfortable, as he would
have his "flea-bag" on the floor of a Nissen hut, but still he was
hard worked. His day was occupied with training, clothing, etc., and
his evening with preparing training programmes and the many other
details of running a Company. There were also night working parties of
which he would have to take his turn every third or fourth night, when
he would be up until 3 or 4 in the morning. From this the civilian who
thinks he was hard worked by doing eight hours a day without any days
off (on big pay) can realise that the soldier was doing as much, if
not more, with all the discomforts and risks over and above.

On the 18th January Lieut.-Colonel D. E. M. M. Crichton took over
command of the Battalion, Colonel Marsh having gone down the line
sick. We were all sorry to part with Colonel Marsh, who was a good
soldier, and who had been with us through all the fighting in the
Somme. He was suffering from fever, the result of many years service
in India, and which had been aggravated by the exposure of wintering
in the Somme. Life under the best circumstances was most miserable,
but to have all the depression of fever on the top of it must have
been exceedingly trying, although many of us at the time did not know
what he had to endure.

One of our experiences about this time was a dug-out fire, some
brilliant genius putting a brazier on the top of a box of
Verey-lights, which after a time went off and started shooting about
the dug-out. The dug-out was situated in the front line in the Le Sars
sunken road, which was generally a sea of mud, often overflowing down
into the dug-out. One would have thought that it was impossible for
any of the timber saturated with mud and water to burn. This soon
proved to be wrong, as the fire worked its way up one of the stairs,
getting a splendid down-draught from the others. The place was soon a
roaring furnace. The officers and men set about building up a
barricade with sandbags. This was an exciting experience, for the
Verey-lights kept shooting about as the fire increased in intensity,
and might at any moment have set fire to the boxes of bombs, etc. One
of the men actually ordered an officer out with the remark, "it was no
place for him," when he began to realise the danger. Perhaps this was
not strictly in accordance with the idea of army discipline, but at
any rate it shewed the good spirit and affection that existed between
the officers and men.

At the beginning of February we were relieved by the 5th Australian
Brigade, the 18th Australian Battalion relieving the Camerons. We went
back through Becourt to Contay, where we went into corps reserve,
nominally for a rest, but practically for intensive training. In this
little village we at last got the opportunity of holding our
long-delayed Christmas and New Year dinner, which took place by
Companies. The 2nd in Command and the Padre proceeded to Amiens to
purchase provisions for the revels--pigs, wine, beer, etc. The first
had to be bought alive in the Pig Market, where acquaintance was
struck up with the most villainous looking Frenchman. The porkers were
chosen from the fat ones that squealed the loudest when poked in the
ribs by the Padre's stick. The dinners were a great success. The
Parish Priest was a guest at the Officer's dinner, and appeared to be
a good judge of wine, and thoroughly to enjoy his meal, besides being
a very jolly old gentleman.




CHAPTER 5.

BATTLE OF ARRAS, 1917.


Our rest was not for long, however, as we started once more to move
north on the 15th February, leaving the Somme area for good. All will
look back upon the Somme as a sort of horrible nightmare of mud and
water, of scarcity of fresh meat rations, fuel, etc., of long and
weary marches up to Le Sars and back again to the camps in "Scots
Redoubt" and Metz Wood, where the conditions were almost as bad as in
the front line. Not a place where the men could be entertained, not a
Y.M.C.A. or other hut within miles of the front line, not a civilian
to be seen. The Lewis Gunners had a specially hard time of it pulling
their hand carts through the mud and shell-holes. The design was
selected at home, doubtless with great care, but they must have been
tested on the Guards' Parade or other sound ground. For the work in
hand it would be difficult to imagine a worse pattern than that of
these carts with their thin iron wheels set close in to the side of
the cart and without any guiding pole or shafts. Luckily they were
soon abandoned. The cold in the line during the winter was intense.
Owing to the muddy conditions the men could not take their great coats
with them, but they were now so hardy that this exposure did not
affect their health.

Now and then an officer was able to "lorry jump" back to Amiens, and
spend the evening round Charlie's Bar, or dine at a most excellent
restaurant, where the dinners and wines were good and the waitresses
pleasing to look upon. In fact, the sight of a woman, however ugly,
was a delight. We fitted up at Albert a house which acted as a kind of
rest billet for those suffering from slight ailments. The Town Major
was always threatening to turn us out, but we contrived to keep
sufficiently in his favour to prevent this catastrophe. We managed to
fit up a long passage as a drying room, with the assistance of some
water pipes which the R.E.'s kindly dumped in the square in front of
the house, and which we quietly appropriated during the night. This
house proved of the greatest value, as the temporarily sick were
employed in washing socks and hose tops, which were dried in this
room, so that every night we were able to send up a supply of dry
socks, etc., to the men in the line in exchange for their dirty wet
ones. No doubt this rest had an excellent effect on the men's health,
and saved many from having to go to hospital.

The transport were generally in lines about La Boiselle Crater.
Sometimes those in the front line imagined that the transport had a
"cushy" time. But one is rather apt to think that the "other man" has
the best of a bargain. No doubt they did not suffer the casualties of
front-line troops, but their hours were long and weary. By night they
struggled up with the rations, etc., often through shell fire, their
carts up to the axles in mud, and the mules sometimes being nearly
drowned by falling into shell-holes, out of which it was a long and
weary business to extricate them. During the day they had to clean and
feed their animals and collect the rations from the "train." They thus
were working practically night and day, in all weathers and during all
hours. It was wonderful how the men and animals were able to carry on.

We left Contay with regret. This was the first place where we had seen
any sort of civilian life for months; and we had just settled down and
begun to make friends with the inhabitants when we had to move on. The
Mayor came and expressed his regret that we were going away, and told
us that the inhabitants had greatly appreciated the good conduct and
kindness of the men. We marched to Moucheaux, via Beauval,
Gazaincourt, Bouquemaison and Crosiette. Here we settled down once
more to train, as we learned that we were to take part in a big
attack. This attack was delayed, as it could not take place until the
new railway line from Doullens to Arras was completed. We soon
received orders that practically the whole of the Battalion was to
move to Milly under Major Macleod, to form a working-party on the
railway cutting there. The men thoroughly enjoyed this change of
employment, which consisted of three shifts of eight hours each per 24
hours, digging at the cutting. There is nothing a soldier appreciates
more than to know the number of hours he will be employed and how long
he is going to get to himself. He hates being messed about. There was
also an element of competition in the work, as the total earth
excavated by each shift was duly recorded, and the rivalry between
Battalions and "shifts" to reach highest out-put was very keen.

At first we had great difficulty with our rations. By some mistake no
arrangements had been made for these. The D.A.Q.M.G., when appealed
to, said he would indent for us, but that according to the regulations
they could not be supplied for 3 days. After the Major had ridden
round the country for some hours he found a Railhead Officer, who,
realising the situation, and not being quite hidebound to the
Regulations, gave us some tins of bully beef and biscuits. Next day
the hunt commenced again, and finally Corps H.Q. put the matter right.
Theoretically, there is no difference between rations of Corps and
other troops, but there is no doubt we never got rations anything like
those we received when acting as Corps troops.

On 24th February, 1917, the Battalion Headquarters moved to Maizeres,
the working party returning from Milly on 2nd March. On the 6th, the
Brigade was inspected by the Commander-in-Chief at Ambrine. The
Brigade was drawn up in quarter column in fighting dress. The
Commander-in-Chief expressed himself highly pleased with the
appearance and steadiness of the Brigade, and gave directions that
this should be communicated to all ranks.

On the 11th March the 44th Brigade relieved the 45th Brigade in
support in Arras, the route being by Penin, Tilloy, Hermaville, St.
Pol-Arras Road. The sheer destruction of the Boche was very apparent.
Before the war the great straight roads had been lined with splendid
trees. These for miles he had cut down and left on the road side. Even
the fruit trees, for which this district was famous, had all been
ruthlessly destroyed. As the Battalion got near Arras the roads became
very congested with traffic, and the men had to move off the highway
or dodge between traffic in order to get on. By the time we passed
under the Baudimont Gate the hour when the troops were allowed out of
billets had arrived. The streets were absolutely packed with men and
vehicles. Although Arras was practically in the front line the
inhabitants remained in their shops, and though shutters were up and
no lights could be shown a brisk trade was still carried on inside the
shops. One of the peculiar things was that the Boche seldom shelled
the town after daylight. If he had done so he would certainly have
caused heavy casualties, and as he must have heard the roar of heavy
traffic, it is difficult to understand why he did not take this
opportunity of doing serious damage.

Our first experience in the line at Arras was in the cemetery
defences, a somewhat gruesome place, and subject to the usual
attentions of the Boches to such a place. One man went to hospital
with what seemed to be a small piece of shell in his cheek, but when
the M.O. extracted it, it was discovered to be a tooth, apparently
belonging to one of the rightful inhabitants! Good shelter was to be
had inside some of the tombs.

On 18th March "D" Company carried out a raid on the enemy's lines. The
zero hour was 2.50 a.m., and Captain W. D. Stuart was in command,
along with Lieut. Semple and Lieut. Morton. The 9th and 12th Division
co-operated by similar raids on their fronts. The object of the raid
was to destroy enemy dug-outs, and to obtain identifications and
information regarding the enemy's lines.

The raiding party took up position along tapes which had been
previously laid out by Captain Stuart. The raiders advanced in two
parties (each two platoons) through separate gaps in the enemy's wire.
They met with no difficulty in forming up, although an enemy party of
about 40 strong had been seen working in front of their wire shortly
before. An enemy machine gun kept firing through the gaps in the wire,
but this was luckily put out of action by a direct hit from a shell.
Both parties succeeded in getting through the wire and entering the
enemy's trenches without encountering the enemy. The fire trench was
found to be badly damaged, and the control trench, a few yards in the
rear, was discovered to be very wide and deep (about 10 feet). The
party working to the north came across six dug-outs. Voices were heard
in them all. Each dug-out was bombed by means of Stoke shells. Wire
frames acting as blocks had been erected in both the fire and
communication trenches, and these made movement along the trenches
difficult. In most cases the parties had to climb out of the trenches
and go round the top.

The party working south found ten dug-outs; two entrances had been
blown in by the artillery bombardment, the remainder were destroyed
with Stoke shells. No dead were found in the trenches, but all
dug-outs were still occupied by the enemy. A machine gun in an
emplacement was destroyed. No gas cylinders were seen nor
identifications obtained. A party of 30 or 40 Boches were seen and
fired at as they retired through our box barrage. This was thought to
be the wiring party which had been seen earlier in the evening. One of
the dug-outs which we destroyed caught fire. The majority of the party
returned to our trenches at 3.25 a.m., though one officer and a Lewis
gunner, who were carrying a wounded man, did not return till later.
The enemy barrage did not come down till 3 a.m., when the support
line--Islington Street--and the cemetery were heavily shelled. The
enemy put up the usual number of lights, those well behind the line
bursting into golden rain. Our casualties amounted to 1 killed, 1
missing believed to be killed, and 35 wounded. Two died of wounds.

The following special orders were issued:--

 "The G.O.C. 15th Division wishes to convey his appreciation to all
 ranks who took part in this morning's raid, and his congratulations
 on the success achieved.

 "The Corps Commander wishes to congratulate all concerned in the
 preparation, execution and success of the raid carried out by the 7th
 Cameron Highlanders."

The C.O. issued a special order congratulating Captain W. G. Stuart,
M.C., 2nd Lieuts. Semple and Morton, Sergeant A. M'Donald,
Lance-Corporal J. Kelly and Privates G. M'Lean and W. Marston on the
gallant and conspicuous part they took in the raid. A special order
was also issued by the Army Commander congratulating the 44th and 46th
Brigades on the successful raids carried out during the month.

From the 3rd to the 7th of April the Battalion was billeted in the
cellars of the Grand Place, Arras, preparatory to the battle. The
shelling by the enemy was now considerable, but we only suffered two
casualties. Before the attack the Padre held a Communion Service in
one of the large cellars, in which many of the officers and men
partook. It was indeed a unique and solemn Service. Every now and then
the sound of a shell bursting amongst the houses above, or in the
Grand Place, would drown the words of the Padre and shake the cellar.
At 11.30 p.m. on the 8th the Battalion moved from the cellars down
into sewers, along which they travelled to the communication trenches,
and so to their assembly trench in front of the cemetery. The
Battalion headquarters were in the cellars of a house in Rue de Douai.

At 3.20 a.m. on the 9th the Battalion was reported in position ready
for the attack. The zero hour was 5.30 a.m. The attack commenced with
the 8/10th Gordons on the right, the 9th Black Watch on the left, and
the 7th Camerons in support. The advance was carried out behind an
intense barrage. The German's first system was gained with slight
loss, the Camerons occupying "O.G.1" and "O.G.2." At 7.30 a.m. the
attack upon the second objective was commenced. The 9th Black Watch on
the left were for a time held up at the Railway Triangle, where there
was heavy fighting, and this also prevented the Gordons from reaching
their objective. The Camerons were then ordered to support the
assaulting battalions, and with their assistance all objectives were
gained. About 3 p.m. the Camerons were ordered to relieve the Black
Watch on the left. The Battalion was re-organised, "B" and "D"
Companies moving forward, two platoons to "Hecq Trench," and two
platoons to "Helle Trench." "A" and "B" Companies moved to "Cable
Trench," which they started to consolidate about 1 p.m. Orders were
then received to proceed eastwards to Feuchy, in support of the 45th
Brigade. This move was carried out and completed by 4 p.m. Later it
was arranged that the position occupied by us was to be taken over by
the 6th Camerons (45th Brigade), and we were to move back to the
trenches we had previously occupied. So ended the first phase of the
battle.

At 12.45 a.m. on the 11th we heard that the attack was to be continued
at 5 a.m. At 3 a.m. orders came through from Brigade to move into a
position occupying part of the "Brown" line which had been captured
previously by the 46th Brigade. This position was occupied by "A"
Company on the right, "C" Company on the left, "B" Company right
support, and "D" Company left support. At 11 a.m. the Companies
attacked in artillery formation, moving half-right for "Orange Hill."
As soon as the crest of the hill was reached we came under heavy
machine gun and shrapnel fire, which for a time delayed the advance,
but the Battalion finally worked forward and occupied a system of
trenches about H29 central. About 2.54 p.m. a message reached us that
the barrage was to again commence at 2.50 p.m., and the Brigade was to
attack at 3. This gave only a few minutes to get the necessary orders
issued, but about 3 p.m. the Battalion commenced the attack. Once
again they came under exceptionally heavy machine gun and shrapnel
fire, but they succeeded in reaching a position running roughly
between Lone Copse and Monchy. Here word was brought about 4.40 p.m.
that the enemy was reported to be preparing a counter attack, and at
once everyone was busy putting the trenches in a state of defence.
However, it was stated shortly afterwards that the counter attack was
no longer to be expected.

A great portion of the Battalion entered Monchy, where they were
placed under command of a Colonel of the Essex Yeomanry, who was in
charge of the troops there. No one who was in Monchy is likely to
forget the sight. The casualties had been heavy amongst both men and
horses, some of the latter being literally blown to pieces. Later,
orders were issued to O.C. Companies to withdraw and link up with the
Gordons from a line about 100 yards in front of the sunken road. This
movement being completed about 3 a.m. On the 12th, the Battalion was
relieved by a Company of the Worcester Regiment, and moved back into
"Helle Trench," which was reached about 5.30 a.m. There it remained
till 3 p.m., when it was finally relieved and moved into billets in
Arras. The strength of the Battalion taking part in these operations
was 23 officers and 521 other ranks; of these 12 officers and 175
other ranks became casualties. The officer casualties were:--

 _Killed._--Lieuts. P. G. Jenkins, G. R. Morton, M.C., R. W. B.
 Semple, M.C., J. F. Smith, J. B. Ronaldson, and 19 other ranks.

 _Wounded._--Captain G. A. C. Davy, Lieuts. S. C. Russell, J. A.
 Symon, D. M. Brown, J. K. M'Millan, E. F. Forrest, and 128 other
 ranks.

 We have also to record the death of C.S.M. Cameron and Sergt.
 Dalgleish, two splendid N.C.O.'s.

We all felt very sorry for Lieuts. Semple and Morton, as these two
splendid young officers had only on the day before the attack been
awarded the Military Cross for their conspicuous gallantry in the raid
which had taken place a few days previously. They were killed while
the sincere congratulations of all ranks still sounded in their ears.

A special order was issued by the Commander-in-Chief:--

 "My warmest congratulations on the important success achieved by you
 yesterday. The manner in which the operations were carried out
 reflects the greatest credit on Commander, staff and troops. Please
 convey to all employed my appreciation of the great skill and
 gallantry shown by them."

The Corps Commander also issued a special order, expressing his
appreciation and thanks for the splendid work done both in the
preparation for, and execution of, the attack. He was particularly
gratified by the energy displayed by all ranks after the third
objective was captured.

The Divisional Commander issued the following special order:--

 "15th Divisional Commander feels sure that this generous
 acknowledgment of the work of the Division will be highly valued by
 all. He wishes to add his own thanks. He is proud to have under his
 command a Division in which officers, N.C.O.'s and men are inspired
 with so fixed a determination to do their duty. The task given to the
 15th Division in the Battle of Arras was a very heavy one, entailing
 hard work in preparation and great gallantry in attack. The
 difficulties of the operation only inspired all ranks to greater
 effort, and brilliant success has been achieved. The crushing defeat
 of the enemy on 9th April was due to the discipline, hard work,
 untiring energy, and magnificent gallantry of all ranks. Another page
 of honour has been added to the glorious record of the Division. The
 Divisional Commander wishes to thank every officer, N.C.O. and man,
 and he feels that it is indeed an honour to command the victorious
 15th Division."

The signallers and runners during the battle of Arras had a severe
time, owing to the heavy shell and machine gun fire. The system of
deep buried cable had not yet been developed, all wires being laid
over the open. They were therefore being constantly cut by shell fire,
and the signallers had to be out continually, both night and day,
repairing them. This also necessitated the use of runners to carry
messages during the periods of the heavy bombardment. Signallers and
runners were picked men, as the work was not only arduous and
dangerous, but required both judgment and commonsense. We were lucky
with the men chosen, as they on this and all other occasions did their
work well, showing courage and devotion to duty.

At the close of this phase of the battle, Lieut.-Colonel Crichton went
down the line sick, the command of the Battalion being taken over by
Major MacLeod. The Battalion was billeted in Arras up till the 23rd
April, re-organising and absorbing fresh drafts. They also practised
the attack in open order, and did a certain amount of rifle practice
in the "butte de tir." We left our billets in Grand Place on the night
of the 22nd, relieving the 8/10th Gordons. We were to attack the enemy
on the 23rd, the first objective being the "Blue" line. At 3.20 a.m.
the Battalion was in position, "D" Company being on the left, "A"
Company on the right, "B" and "C" Companies in support. On our right
were the Seaforths, on the left the Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders
(45th Brigade).

The zero hour was 4.45 a.m., when the Battalion commenced to attack
under a heavy barrage. The enemy almost at once opened a barrage on
our front line, and also an intense machine gun fire from an
emplacement on our immediate front and from the high ground on the
south side of Scarpe River. The machine gun emplacement on our front
was to have been knocked out by our trench mortars, which were to open
rapid fire on it half a minute before we attacked; but this scheme was
not carried into effect, and we suffered very heavy casualties when
the men got over the top and rushed the gun at the point of the
bayonet. The fact that Lieut. Anderson, the trench mortar officer, was
killed probably accounted for the failure of the trench mortar to
knock out the machine gun. Lieut. Anderson was a most skilled and
gallant officer, beloved by all, and his death must have had a
disconcerting effect on his men. He was a cheery individual, and had
often rendered very valuable service in the attack. We missed him both
as a soldier and as a man. After rushing the gun at the point of the
bayonet, our right was held up by machine gun fire. Our left, in the
meantime, pushed on to Bullet Trench, seizing the south end of it,
taking about 40 prisoners and capturing a machine gun. Here about 5.30
a.m., finding they were out of touch both on their left and right,
they dug themselves in. The centre of the Battalion for a time had
been held up by the machine gun fire, but succeeded finally in
advancing and fortifying a post about the sunken road (5.45 a.m.) A
small party on the right, with the assistance of Captain Morrison of
the Black Watch, formed another post in the sunken road. By 10.30 a.m.
those who were holding the post in Bullet Trench had managed, with the
assistance of a few stokes and rifle grenades, to clear the trench up
to the Cambrai Road, three posts being formed in the trenches.

For a time our right was insecure, as the Black Watch, who had
attacked the village of Guemappe, had not succeeded in holding it, and
had been driven out by the enemy. About 12 mid-day a new barrage was
formed, under which we pushed forward the posts in the sunken road,
advancing to a part of "Hammer Trench." These posts, being on high
ground slightly in front of the village, spotted the enemy forming up
for a counter attack against the Black Watch, and our Lewis Gunners
were able to do considerable execution before the counter attack was
broken up. The 46th Brigade advanced through the 44th, and again our
Lewis gunners were able to do good work in firing on the enemy as he
retired from the trenches on the right. After re-organising the
Battalion moved back to behind the "Brown" line about 2 a.m. on the
24th.

Everyone believed we were now done with fighting for the time being,
as our casualties had been heavy, and we were all congratulating each
other on being the lucky ones who had got through it. Next day,
however, the Commanding Officer received orders that we were to go
back into the line in order to take Cavalry Farm on the 26th, as
another Battalion had failed to do so. No doubt it was necessary, as
there were no fresh troops available, but no one, unless he has done
it, can realise the feelings of a Commanding Officer when he has to
order the men to turn round and go back into the fight under such
circumstances. But he was proud of his men who, tired as they were,
once more turned back and faced the enemy without a grumble.

 [Illustration: Lieut. Colonel NORMAN MACLEOD, C.M.G., D.S.O.,
 commanded from 23rd April, 1917, to 10th June, 1918.]

Owing to casualties in the previous fighting, we had now only three
Company Officers left, besides the Commanding Officer and Lieut.
Legate, who was acting as Adjutant. A request was made to be allowed
to bring up fresh officers from the transport lines, but this was
refused. Unfortunately, just as the Battalion was moving off, one of
the three officers became a casualty, leaving only two, neither of
whom had been in action before the previous day's fighting. When we
reached the lines and found that the Battalion was to carry out the
attack on Cavalry Farm, the Commanding Officer suggested to Brigade
that he would go forward to Company Headquarters, as the Battalion had
been practically reduced to the strength of a Company, especially in
officers. However, the Brigade would not agree to this.

The intention was that the Battalion was to take Cavalry Farm and the
trenches to the east of it. The 45th Brigade were to attack to the
north of Cambrai Road, and take a German strong point so as to protect
our left, while the Black Watch were to advance on our right and form
a line of posts. As soon as the Battalion had captured the farm, the
9th Pioneer Gordons were to make a communication trench up to it. The
attack commenced at 11 p.m. We managed to capture the farm, but on
getting past it we found the trench to the east strongly held by the
enemy. These we attacked, but almost immediately found ourselves
between two fires, coming from the trenches in front and from machine
guns close on our left rear, situated in the strong point which the
45th Brigade had failed to capture. The result was that we had to fall
back on the farm. In the meantime the Gordons, having heard that we
had taken the farm, came up to commence their trench. They also came
under the same heavy cross fire as was holding up our advance, and had
to withdraw. The Major in Command and many others become casualties.

This information being received at the Battalion Headquarters, the
Commanding Officer decided to go forward and try to re-organise the
attack. The communication trench was filled with 9th Gordons, and it
became necessary to advance over the open, which was a slow process,
as the ground was being swept by machine guns. On reaching the front
line it was found crowded with troops, in consequence of the
Seaforths, who were in support, having moved forward into the front
line when our Battalion had advanced to the attack. They were now
mixed up with our men who had come back. The Seaforths were ordered to
withdraw to the support line, with the exception of one Company which
was retained to assist us in holding the front line. It was
practically impossible to take the trenches east of the farm unless
the strong point on the north side of the road was attacked and
captured. Having therefore formed posts in the farm and to the right,
to link up with the Black Watch, he proceeded to the 45th Brigade
Company, who had failed to capture the strong point on the north side
of the road, and from which position the enemy were able to fire into
our rear when we had gone forward. They informed him that they did not
intend to attack the strong point again. This made it impossible for
us to continue the attack beyond the farm with any chance of success.
That evening the Battalion was relieved by the Seaforths, and moved
into support. The next day the Battalion was occupied in burying dead.
This work was difficult, as the enemy, seeing the movement, kept up
intermittent shelling. However, we managed to collect 64 bodies of
Camerons, which we buried in one grave. The Commanding Officer took
the service, but had to limit the number of men present owing to the
danger of casualties from shelling.

In order to save space, the majority of men were buried lying on their
side. A touching feature was the fact that someone had taken each
man's arm and put it round the body lying next to him. From the top of
the trench one could imagine that the men were sleeping, embraced in
each other's arms, more especially as they were buried in their kilts
just as they had fought, no blankets or other covering being
available. Altogether it was a most moving scene. The machine gun,
which has already been referred to, and which should have been knocked
out before the attack, had taken its toll, as most of these bodies
were found round about its emplacement. One could well appreciate the
desperate gallantry of the men who rushed it. We had the satisfaction,
however, of knowing that many of the enemy's gun crew had been
bayoneted by our men.

A good example of the grit of the young officer and also the
difficulty of obtaining accurate information regarding casualties was
experienced. Lieut. Mackay was missing, and though several men were
certain that they had seen him dead in a certain shell-hole, his body
could not be found. One reliable N.C.O. was so certain of its position
that he guaranteed, if he were allowed to go out, he would return
directly with the body. His re-request was granted, but proved a
failure. As a matter of fact, Mackay was found dead a considerable
distance further on. He had been severely wounded where the men saw
him, and they had been wrongly convinced that he was dead. He had been
killed finally by a direct hit. He must have suffered severe wounds
first of all, as his right hand, which had been blown off, and other
wounds, had been dressed. Such wounds would have more than justified
anyone going back to the dressing station, but this brave young
officer, although stunned and wounded to such an extent that his own
men thought he was dead, had evidently advanced with the remainder of
the Battalion as soon as he had regained consciousness.

If the Battalion on our left had succeeded in obtaining their
objective, or had at least silenced the enemy, the attack on the farm
would probably have proved a success. On the night of the 28/29th of
April the Battalion was relieved by the 3rd London Regiment, and
withdrew into billets in the Grand Place. The fighting had been long
and severe, and if fresh troops had been available to go through on
the completion of the first "phase" the success might have been even
greater. At the close of the fighting at that time one was able to
move a considerable distance forward at night without encountering the
enemy, who must have been holding his line very lightly and far back.
He had recovered himself, however, when the second phase started. It
is interesting to read with what surprise and despondency General
Ludendorf, the Chief of the German Staff, writes concerning the
battle. He says:--

 "On that day (9th April) I celebrated my birthday. I looked forward
 to the expected offensive with confidence, and was now deeply
 depressed. Was this to be the result of all our care and trouble
 during the past half year? A day like April the 9th threw all
 calculations to the winds."

Such an expression of opinion is high praise to the troops whose
vigour and bravery brought such a disaster to the enemy.

It may be remembered that at that time the latter part of the battle
of Arras was almost over-shadowed in the press by the very gallant and
successful attack by the Canadians when they took Vimy Ridge. It is
instructive, however, to read in General Ludendorf's Memoirs the
statement:--

 "On the 11th they took Monchy, and during the following night we
 evacuated the Vimy Ridge."

So ends the battle of Arras.




CHAPTER 6.

THE SALIENT, 1917.


On 29th April, 1917, the Battalion moved out of Arras to Semincourt,
via Rues St. Aubert, Denvielle, and Bernville. Here training was
carried out until the 8th, when the Battalion moved to Grande
Rullecourt. On the 21st May the 15th Division were transferred to the
19th Corps, and moved to Vacqueril. On the 22nd they again moved to
St. Georges via Conchy and Wail. On the 6th instant, Lieut.-Colonel
Crichton officially relinquished command of the Battalion, which was
taken over by Major MacLeod, who had been acting C.O. since the second
phase of the Battle of Arras. We remained in St. Georges carrying out
field training till the 20th of June. This summer it was supposed that
the British had adopted the German system of "storm troops," and that
the 15th Division was one of these. Whether this was true or not,
there is no doubt that we were employed in all the big engagements,
and when we were not fighting we were out training for the next attack.

While at St. Georges we held Brigade Sports. Captain Lumsden, who had
been acting as Adjutant for some time in place of Captain A. R.
Chapman, who had been appointed Staff Captain 46th Brigade, was now
confirmed in the appointment. Captain Chapman, who was one of the
original officers, had acted as Adjutant for some time, and by his
keenness, efficiency, and good temper had proved himself a most
suitable officer for the work. We parted with him with regret, and
wished him all success on the Staff.

On 18th June, Major-General Sir F. W. N. M'Cracken, K.C.B., D.S.O.,
relinquished command of the Division, and issued the following special
order:--

 "In bidding farewell to the 15th Division, I wish to express my
 heartfelt thanks to all ranks for their continued assistance to me
 throughout the period of over two years since I assumed Command.

 "The standard of discipline and training which has enabled the
 results already obtained will, I am convinced, lead in future to
 still greater success. The maintenance of this standard, added to the
 high sense of duty of all ranks in the Division, will inevitably
 enable the same to obtain the final victory before returning to the
 land of their birth, which is already so justly proud of their fine
 achievements.

 "I shall at all times watch their movements with the deepest
 interest, and I wish them every possible success in the future."

It was with great regret that we parted with General M'Cracken, who
had so ably commanded the Division since its arrival in France, and
whose ability in no little way helped to achieve success in many hard
fought battles. The command of the Division was taken over by
Major-General H. F. Thullier, C.B., C.M.G.

On the 21st June we left St. Georges and began to move northward. The
first night we stayed with three Companies at Croix and one at
Siracourt; next day we went on to Pernes, and the next to Borecq, with
two Companies at Ecquedeque, where we spent the Sunday. On the Monday
we moved to Steenbecque, and from there to St. Sylvestre Cappel. On
the 27th the Battalion went into Reserve in the 9th Corps area,
camping about two miles southwest of Vlamertinghe. A special order was
issued by the G.O.C. 15th Division, who expressed himself as very
pleased with the march, discipline and appearance of the Battalion. In
spite of the fact that they had no breakfast, the long march was
completed, with only one man falling out.

On the 2nd of July we moved forward into the support line via
Reigersburg Chateau, "C" Company being in "Half Moon" trench, "B" and
"D" in the Ecole, "A" Company in the Convent Ypres, and Headquarters
on the Menin Road. This was our first experience of the Salient, and
we got a hot reception, being heavily shelled, and suffering several
casualties while going in. In the Salient there were no trenches, as
the ground was too wet for digging, and breastworks had to be built.
From the support we moved into the front line, with Headquarters at
Dragoon Farm, and with support companies in St. James' trench,
Milcote, Posier defences and road. Coming out of the line, we returned
to Eerie Camp. From there we marched to Poperinghe, trained to
Arnecke, and thence we marched again to Le Choche. Here we carried out
training on the Rubroucke training ground. On the 17th the Battalion
moved to Winnezele under orders of the 46th Brigade. From there we
moved to Toronto Camp, via Watou and Poperinghe, halting for an hour
on the road for breakfast.

On the 23rd we once more took over the front line with Headquarters
under the railway at South Lane, in a dug-out which was exceedingly
wet, and the men had to be kept constantly at the pumps. That portion
of the dug-out which the C.O. and signallers occupied was a small side
shaft without any ventilation, so that a man had to be kept at the top
of the stair pumping air down to us. As a rule this gentleman was
rather sleepy, and had to be encouraged with powerful language. On one
occasion, however, air came blowing in with great force. We soon
discovered that some gas shells had exploded near the mouth of the
dug-out which had effectually wakened up the warrior at the pump, and
he, with a sudden spurt of energy, was diligently pumping the gas
down. We were now busy constructing works preparatory to the attack,
all of which had to be carefully camouflaged.

On the 24th a successful little raid was carried out by twelve other
ranks of "A" Company under command of 2nd Lieut. J. Miller. Taking a
course parallel to the railway, they found the enemy's trenches much
battered, but the wire, though flattened, was difficult to get over. A
machine gun emplacement was discovered on the railway embankment. Its
crew fled, two being killed as they were running away, and one brought
back as a prisoner carrying the machine gun. Our casualty was one man
slightly wounded.

At this time we were actively patrolling every night as well as
carrying out work parties. On the 25th we got orders for relief, but
these were cancelled later, and we were told we had to remain in the
front line. On the night of the 27/28th, orders were received that we
were to carry out a large raid on the enemy's front on the afternoon
of the 28th, two Companies being employed in this operation. This was
a very tall order. In the first place, we had never had an opportunity
of patrolling the part of the front over which the raid was to be
carried out. On the map, it appeared as if part of it was an old pond.
Neither did we know the condition of the enemy's wire, etc. In
addition to this the Battalion had been in the line for some time, and
the men were therefore very tired. Further, the time allowed for
preparation was so short that it was practically impossible to get up
and issue the usual paraphernalia for a raid.

The task appeared to be beyond our powers, and the C.O. reported this
to the Brigade, who more or less agreed with him. The Brigadier made
representations to the Division, but the answer came back that the
raid had to be carried out. No doubt this was inevitable, but it must
be remembered that it was usual for a Battalion doing a raid of this
size to be taken out of the line and given time to rehearse it,
examine the ground, and consider the whole problem with the Artillery
Commander, etc. What must be, must be, and we found ourselves with
only a few hours wherein to decide on our line of action, issue the
necessary orders, and, as far as possible, collect such stores as were
available, a somewhat difficult matter, as movement during the day
generally led to shelling. The orders were that the raid was to go to
a considerable depth, the final objective being the enemy's reserve
lines (the first objective in the general attack which was to take
place shortly). The raiding party consisted of "D" Company with three
platoons of "A" Company, under command of Captain J. L. C. Jenkins. A
smaller party of 14 other ranks, under 2nd Lieut. Elliot, were ordered
to raid the railway embankment on our right and look for a suspected
machine gun.

The zero hour was 7 p.m., the raiding party being lined up at 6.45. At
zero the artillery trench mortar and machine guns opened an intense
barrage on the enemy's front, and the raiders at the same time left
our trenches and followed the barrage. The enemy's front line system
was found to be badly knocked about, any of the enemy who had survived
the bombardment being either killed or taken prisoners. The raiders
then pushed on over the support lines to the reserve lines. Many of
the enemy were encountered, and these too were either killed or taken
prisoners. A machine gun was also captured. The small party who raided
the railway embankment bombed a culvert and dugout which was occupied.
They did not discover the machine gun, but they took a few prisoners.
Both parties returned, having inflicted many casualties on the enemy
and taken 1 officer and 39 other ranks prisoners and 1 machine gun.
Several other prisoners were driven in to the Battalion on our left.
Our casualties were very slight, being 1 O.R. killed, 2 missing, and 6
wounded. 2nd Lieut. A. Fraser and Lieut. Elliot were both wounded.

Altogether the raid was a huge success, which was all the more
creditable considering the very difficult circumstances under which it
was carried out. No doubt the element of surprise helped the result.
Many raids are given away by the preparations, especially by officers,
both Staff and Regimental, coming for days and looking over the top in
order to examine the ground. The Battalion received warm
congratulations on the success of the raid from the G.O.C. 15th
Division. At last we were relieved on the 29th by the 8/10th Gordons,
and went into Brigade reserve. Next evening the Battalion moved into
position of assembly for the attack, "A" Company with two platoons at
"A.R.A." dump, 30 men at "Thatch Barn," 30 men in "Half Moon" trench,
"B" Company in "St. James' trench," "C" Company in "Half Moon" trench,
and "D" in "Hedge trench" south of "West Lane," the Battalion
Headquarters being in South Lane. The Battalion got into position
without any casualties. This was the first night that the enemy's
artillery was more or less silent, owing no doubt to the fact that our
artillery was gas shelling their batteries. "A" Company was used for a
carrying party, the remainder of the Battalion remaining in their
assembly position until 10 a.m.

Shortly after zero hour, "Thatch Barn" dump was blown up by the enemy,
causing many casualties to the carrying party. This considerably
disorganised the party and added greatly to their work. The conditions
caused by the shelling and the muddy nature of the ground made it
impossible to carry full loads. It was also found that the "Yukon
Pack," while enabling men to carry heavy loads, was inclined to make
them top-heavy, and on the uneven and slippery ground they easily lost
their balance and fell. This either necessitated extra men without
packs assisting them to their feet again, or else they had to take the
packs off in order to get up, and then reload. This caused
considerable delay. The extra weight also made the men's feet sink
deep in the mud, rendering marching extremely difficult and
exhausting. Most of the party was made up of a draft without any
previous training with the "Yukon Pack."

Three out of the four Company Officers and a Company-Sergt.-Major
became casualties, the Company being reduced to 26 other ranks. Lieut.
Mackay, who was in command, shewed great pluck and determination in
the way he organised the parties and got the materials forward. He was
wounded himself in the leg, but insisted on going up to the forward
dump to see the work properly handed over before going to the dressing
station to have his wounds attended to. In addition to the actual pain
involved, his wound was unfortunately saturated with dirt, the result
being that this fine young officer died a few days later from the
effects. Besides being a good officer, he was a splendid young fellow.
He had just left one of the great public schools and had taken a
scholarship at Oxford, which was waiting for him on his return.

About 10 a.m. the remaining three companies of the Battalion advanced
and occupied the German front system of trenches. At 1 p.m. the
Headquarters moved forward to the German reserve lines. The enemy
shelling was severe, but they were lucky enough to find an old German
concrete machine gun post for a new Headquarters. One platoon went
forward about 2 o'clock to construct a strong point under an R.E.
officer. When they got there, however, they found they were drawing so
much shell fire that the R.E. officer decided not to proceed with the
work. About 5 a.m. next morning the Battalion moved forward to
support, relieving the Seaforth Highlanders, who replaced the Black
Watch in the front line, the latter taking our place in the reserve.
The position of the Battalion now was two Companies in the Trench
immediately behind North Station Buildings, and one Company in the
strong points.

We were suffering considerably from the mud, many of the rifles were
almost choked with it, and even ammunition could not be put into the
magazine without a portion of the mud on the men's hands going in
along with it. The Commanding Officer, on going round in the morning,
insisted on getting the arms cleaned as far as possible, a precaution
which proved itself of considerable advantage later on, for the enemy
counter-attacked about 3 p.m. Captain Symon got his Company out in
front of the trench ready to counter-attack. This movement was
conformed to by the Company on the left. As soon as he saw that the
enemy had broken through our front line Captain Symon gave his orders
to charge with fixed bayonets. The enemy were driven back, and we even
gained a little ground.

The enemy put down a fairly heavy barrage on our front trench and
immediately behind it. There was also a considerable amount of machine
gun and rifle fire, as well as some sniping from a distance. We took
four prisoners, and killed many of the enemy who were seen retiring on
the hill opposite. As our right flank was now in the air no further
advance, on our part, could be made, and we had to form a flank
defence along the Ypres-Roulers railway. The two Companies remained in
the front line. That night we were relieved in support by the 8/10th
Gordons and took over the remainder of the front line, which we held
for the following two days, until relieved on the night of the 3rd/4th
by two Companies of the Munster Fusiliers.

During the attack we had found little use for the Mills bomb, partly
because there were few trenches to attack, and partly because the men
had now got more confidence in their rifles. The Rifle Grenadiers were
carrying rifle grenades in sand bags in their hands. Many of these got
lost, so that it was decided that it would be better to carry fewer
grenades in future and that these should be worn in the equipment, the
waistcoat pattern being considered the best for the purpose. In the
counter-attack the men fired their rifles from the hip, which possibly
had a good moral effect, although cold steel was the deciding factor.
The casualties during the operations from the 31st July to 3rd August
were 7 officers killed, and 285 other ranks.

On the 4th August the Battalion moved to Winnezwele by bus. Here we
were inspected by the G.O.C. 15th Division. We were drawn up in three
sections, the first of officers and other ranks who took part in the
operations, the second of those who were with details, and the third
of drafts. The G.O.C. expressed his appreciation of the excellent work
performed by the Battalion in the recent operations under very
exceptional circumstances. Here on the 14th we held regimental sports.
"A" Company was successful in winning the tug-of-war and the
"six-a-side football" match. The sergeants beat the officers in the
tug-of-war. The officers, however, were successful in winning the
tug-of-war against all comers from the Brigade. The Company
championship in points was as follows:--"B" Company, 50; "A" Company,
26; "C" Company, 24; and "D" Company, 20. The best all round athlete
was C.S.M. Keith, "B" Company. At the close of the sports, the prizes
were presented by Brigadier-General Marshall. The Divisional Band
played at intervals during the forenoon, and the massed pipes of the
Brigade played at the close of the sports. Everything went off without
a hitch, and great credit is due to Lieut. Gibb and his Committee for
the way they arranged and carried out the programme.

On the 20th we once more returned to the line in order to continue the
offensive, the disposition of the Brigade being, 8th Seaforths on the
right, 7th Camerons on the left, and the 8/10th Gordons in support.
The route taken by the Headquarters was via Reigersberg Chateau and
No. 4 track. The Battalion, less four platoons, proceeded via the
White Chateau. The Headquarters were in Pommern Redoubt. The zero hour
was 4.45 a.m., when the attack was launched and carried on for about
200 yards west of Hill 35. Here the Battalion came under very heavy
machine gun and rifle fire from Gallipoli Farm and Iberin Farm, where
they were held up. The Battalions on the right and left also being
held up, we consolidated the position which we had gained, with the
assistance of the 8/10th Gordons, while the 9th Pioneer Gordons
constructed a strong point immediately in our rear. We held this
position till the night of the 22nd/23rd, when we were relieved by the
9th Black Watch, and proceeded to the support position in Rupprecht
Farm, with the Battalion Headquarters at Verlorenhock. The next day we
were relieved by the 8/10th Gordons and proceeded to Eerie Camp. Our
casualties were, 4 officers killed, 5 officers wounded, 3 other ranks
killed, and 132 wounded. The time was now employed in re-constructing
the Battalion and carrying out preliminary training. The Division then
received orders to move south.

General Sir H. P. Gough, K.C.B., Officer Commanding the 5th Army,
stated in a farewell message to the 15th Division that "he parted with
them with great regret. The reputation of the Division has been earned
on many battlefields, and has never stood higher than now. He wishes
it all good fortune and many further successes in the future. Will ye
no come back again?"

While the Battalion was on the march for the Wateau Area to entrain,
it was inspected by the G.O.C. of the 5th Army, who expressed to the
Commanding Officer his very high appreciation of the work of the
Battalion, and warmly congratulated him on this account, and on the
successful raids they had carried out. It was with no feeling of
regret that we marched south leaving the Salient behind us, where it
was not only a case of fighting the enemy, but also of fighting an
almost worse enemy in the elements. It is quite impossible to describe
the conditions of that half-inundated land and the sea of mud which
was stirred up by the heavy shelling on the ground over which we had
to attack.

The following is a vivid description by General Ludendorff in his
"Memoirs" of the fighting in the Salient. While written of his own
Army, it is also applicable to ours:--

 "The fifth act of the great drama in Flanders opened. Enormous masses
 of ammunition, such as the human mind had never imagined before the
 war, were hurled on the bodies of men who passed a miserable
 existence, scattered in mud-filled shell-holes.

 "The horror of the shell-hole area of Verdun was surpassed. It was no
 longer life at all, it was mere unspeakable suffering. Through this
 world of mud the attackers dragged themselves slowly but steadily.
 Caught in the advance zone, by our hail of fire, they often
 collapsed. Then the mass came on again, rifles and machine guns being
 jammed with mud. Man fought against man, and only too often the mass
 was successful.... The enemy lost heavily. When we occupied the
 battlefield in the Spring of 1918 they lay in their thousands. We
 knew that the enemy suffered heavily, but we also knew he was
 amazingly strong and, what was equally important, had an
 extraordinary stubborn will."

As there were no dugouts, and the men were living in shelters only,
every tour saw a considerable number of casualties. The enemy had the
Menin Road and other tracks carefully taped, and the area behind the
front line received almost more attention from the enemy's artillery
than the front line itself. The Headquarters were generally in the
remains of houses partly protected by concrete, but which would have
easily been destroyed by a direct hit. In fact, on more than one
occasion the officers at Headquarters left the protection of these
buildings and sat in a field watching the enemy bombard them. This,
however, proved good for the morale of the front line troops, who
often used to be "bucked up" at seeing the Headquarters getting it hot.

The reserve billets in Ecole outside Ypres, and the cellars of the
convent in Ypres, did not afford much comfort, for, while they were
fairly well protected, the approaches were constantly being shelled,
so that the men were more or less confined to the cellars.

We were the first Division to experience the effects of Mustard gas.
When we first learned of its power of burning the skin, it was thought
that we would probably suffer badly in the kilt. However, it is
satisfactory to know that the kilt once again proved its efficiency as
a fighting garment. While we have no statistics, we believe it is true
that we did not suffer more than the trousered regiments in this
respect, the reason being that it was generally the parts of the body
where the skin was tender that got burnt. The skin of the legs having
got hardened by exposure to the weather, was generally able to
withstand the effects of gas in the same way as the hands and face.
Again, most of the cases of burning were caused by men sitting down on
the ground which was saturated with the gas. The kilt, being thick,
the gases could not easily penetrate it, and no doubt its swinging in
the air, when the men got up, helped to dispel them. In fact, the men
did not suffer much from the effects of burning unless the shell burst
close enough to sprinkle them with the liquid.

We regret to record the fact that within a short time of our handing
over our Headquarters in Pommern Redoubt, which was a most unhealthy
spot, Major Murray, Commanding the Black Watch (better known as
"Haggis," and after whom the Divisional rest camp was called), and
some of his staff, were killed by a direct hit at the entrance of the
shelter. The Headquarters, which consisted of an old German machine
gun concrete emplacement, were very low. We could not stand up in
them. There was no ventilation except through the door, and when they
were filled with signallers, officers, etc., with one or two candles
burning, the heat and exhaustion of the air became terrible. After the
first phase we experienced great difficulty in getting back the
wounded, of whom there were a great number. One must say a word in
praise of the splendid work done on this and many other occasions by
the stretcher bearers. Lacking the excitement of fighting, they
carried on their humane work often under heavy shell fire, always
showing a splendid example of devotion to duty. Owing to the mud in
the Salient, their work here was exceedingly arduous as well as
dangerous. It often took four men to carry a stretcher back to the aid
post, and even then it was a slow job. Their work, therefore, during
some of the heavy fighting was practically continuous night and day.
Often very weary, yet never complaining, they doggedly carried on. Not
many of them received honours, although many well deserved them. The
mud so delayed the removal of the wounded that some of them lay in
dugouts and shelters for a couple of days. At last the Division sent
up a large number of men under a Colonel of the R.A.M.C., who finally
got them taken down. His energy was splendid. He wandered about at
early dawn, even in No Man's Land, looking for the wounded in shell
holes, closely followed by his faithful little dog.

The Headquarters at one time were in an old Boche strong point.
Unfortunately, as it was the only place protected, some of the men in
the trench round about it would rush to it for shelter, whenever heavy
shelling started. As many as possible squeezed inside, but it seldom
contained all, and as it was no doubt the enemy's target we had
several casualties in the trench outside. It was little use telling
the men not to come, for each hoped to be fortunate enough to find
room inside, and the desire for security overmastered all else. The
floor of the dugout was a foot deep in water, which kept slowly
getting deeper as the water in the trench increased, and its smell was
horrible, as it was partly mixed with the blood of the men killed
outside. There was only one bed, which was occupied for the two days
we were there by a wounded officer. We all had to sit and sleep on
boxes with our feet perched on petrol tins. The usual result of trying
to sleep in this position was that we had hardly got off when our feet
would slip from the tin into the water, wakening us up, after which we
had to start again.

The Adjutant, Signallers and Orderly Room Sergeant had a trying time
in carrying on their work. One often admired the way in which the
Orderly Room Clerk performed his duties on this and other occasions.
Numerous returns had to be sent into Brigade, operation orders, orders
for work parties and ration parties had to be written out by him,
generally in triplicate at least. There he was stowed away in a
corner, without a table, writing on his knee with nothing but a bag to
keep his papers in, often working late into the night by the light of
a solitary candle balanced on a piece of wood stuck into the wall of
the dug-out, yet always doing his work efficiently and well without a
grumble or complaint.

The transport had some very severe experiences also in getting up
rations, which was no easy job. Carrying parties found many
difficulties. There was a great deal of work to be done, and therefore
ration parties had to be reduced to a minimum. In the dark it was no
easy matter to find the map locations where the rations were dumped,
as there was nothing to distinguish one shell-hole from another. On
more than one occasion the carrying parties were so wearied with the
struggle through the mud with heavy loads that they had to leave the
rum ration behind, a convincing proof that they were at the last gasp.

Although possibly some of the Division may have been a little shaken
by their terrible experiences in the fighting during the third battle
of Ypres, this was not the case with the Camerons. We had met with
great success in all our raids, we had countered the German's
determined counter-attack which had driven in our front line, and,
while we had certainly suffered heavy casualties during the battle, we
had always been able to make ground. In the last phase many of the
officers and men had just joined the Battalion from drafts, and their
baptism was indeed severe. We therefore marched away with a feeling of
elation, although everyone was naturally fagged out and glad of the
prospect of a short rest from the mud and dirt.

It is difficult to give a general description of the front line in
France and Belgium. It ranged from the breastworks and mud of Ypres to
the crater areas and sap heads at Hulluch; where mines exploding were
a daily occurrence, and the dead formed part of the parapet; or to the
shell-hole area of the Somme, where the enemy looked down on the top
of us and could get direct observation for his shell fire. Civilians
and even Staff Officers doing a tour of the trenches were very
properly sent to quiet areas, and so often formed wrong impressions.
Thus a well known officer, who has written an account of the life at
G.H.Q., gives the following interesting information concerning the
trenches.

 "Behind the parapet it was almost as safe, and on dry days as
 pleasant, as on a marine parade. A solid fortification of sand bags,
 proof against any blow except that of a big high explosive shell,
 enclosed each side of a walk, drained, paved with duck boards, and
 lined with dug-outs, in places adorned with little flower beds."

Possibly these amenities existed somewhere, but certainly all the
years we were in France we never came across such a front line. "Big
High Explosives!" Why, it did not often require more than a "pip
squeak" to push in the parapet! A heavy shower of rain was sufficient
to cause it to collapse from its own weight!

The same writer says if he were

 "Seeking the fit adjective that could be applied to it in its
 superlative, it would certainly not be 'exciting,' nor yet
 'dangerous.' The life was exciting, and it was dangerous a little."

He then goes on to describe the duties as not so dangerous as that of
a policeman who has to stop a runaway horse! He evidently never served
in a front line where for days the Boche put down a practice barrage,
or where he was in the habit of following you along the trench with a
shower of aerial darts; or in a front line which you knew was mined,
and it was a question whether you or he were going to be blown up
first. But enough! Let the casualty lists for each tour in the line
speak for themselves. As for excitement, recommend us to night
patrolling with Very Lights and an active enemy.

The Battalion marched from Watau at 7 a.m. on 1st September, 1917, via
Godwaers-velde, and Cemelhof to Gaestre Railway Station, where they
entrained at 2.5 p.m. for Arras, which was reached at 9 p.m., and
marched back to billets at Montenescourt. On the 7th of September we
once more entered the Arras sector, relieving the 10/11th H.L.I. at
Blangy Park. We now settled down into this area, and a delightful
place it was after our experience in the Salient. The park at Blangy
must have contained many fine residences. The grounds were well
wooded, although much destroyed, and there were remains of what were
formerly beautiful gardens. The river Scarpe flows through the woods
and fills several artificial ponds, where the men were able to spend
much of their time bathing and basking in the sun.

Major-General Reed, V.C., had now taken over command of the Division,
Major-General Thulliers having received an important appointment at
home in connection with the production of gas.

On the 14th October we were instructed to send over two small fighting
patrols, consisting of 1 officer and 4 O.R.'s each. The idea was that,
while a raid was being conducted on our right, these patrols should
cross "No Man's Land," enter the German trench, and, if possible,
seize some identifications. It was not intended that they should
search the German trench, but simply rush over and back again. The
raid was to be assisted with a preliminary discharge of thermite
shells and a ten minutes' bombardment with trench mortars. It was to
take place during daylight, though the proposition to our minds did
not appear very hopeful. "No Man's Land" was fairly wide, and one
could be sure that the enemy would be fully alert, as the raid on the
right was bound to attract his attention.

Lieut. E. D. Hoskins and Lieut. A. Chisholm were chosen to command the
raiding parties for which there were many volunteers. The first
patrol, under Lieut. Chisholm, got over the top and suffered 2
casualties going across "No Man's Land." The officer was killed near
the enemy trench, and only one of the party returned. The second
party, under Lieut. Hoskins, got safely across "No Man's Land" and
were seen to jump into the enemy trench, but none of them ever
returned. It was learned later that Lieut. Hoskins and the others were
all killed. Out of the raiders, therefore, only one escaped. We also
sustained the further casualties of 4 killed and 6 wounded by the
bombardment. These were the only really unsuccessful raids which the
Battalion ever undertook. We felt they were foredoomed to failure. No
enemy were going to allow a small party of four men to walk across "No
Man's Land" in broad daylight. It is reported that Lieut. Hoskins
turned to his men before going over the top and said: "I am a
Catholic, and am going to say a petition before going over; I don't
know what you fellows are, but I advise you also to say your prayers,
as none of us will ever come back alive." They went across, and were
all killed in the enemy's lines, no doubt fighting as brave men would.

On the 19th, "A" Company returned from the third Corps Musketry Camp,
where they had been under training, and were congratulated by the C.O.
on the successful results of their shooting. They gained the first and
second prizes both in the "rapid firing" and in the "knockout"
competitions, and they also won the second prize in the "snap"
shooting competition for teams of six, and in the "pill box"
competition. In the 17th Corps boxing competition Private E. Davies
and Private D. Tate both won their heats on points, these being the
only two men we entered. This was a very creditable performance. About
this time men from the Lovat Scouts, of whom there were a good many in
the Battalion, were being formed into a Battalion of "Observers." It
was understood they would live behind the line as Corps troops and
only have to come up to observe from observation posts which were not
generally in the front line, and then only if the weather was clear.
Naturally there was a rush for the job, for living behind the line
with no more night working parties was too good a thing to miss. In
the long run, however, not many men were actually taken away from us.

We were glad to hear of the success of the actions further north, and
about the 20th of November the position was so promising that we were
under orders to be prepared to move at fifteen minutes notice, in the
event of the enemy retiring on our front. Unfortunately, however, this
never came off. During the tour in the trenches from the 8th to the
20th of November we had a very strenuous time in improving trenches
and erecting wire. The Brigadier expressed his appreciation of the
manner in which all ranks had carried out these duties.

In November Brigadier General Marshall left the Brigade to take over
an important home appointment. He had endeared himself to us all.
Constantly in the front line in all weather he had a practical
knowledge and sympathy with the discomforts and difficulties which the
troops had to contend with. Kindly and most considerate yet inspiring
all with confidence by his undoubted ability and cheerful manner, it
was with great regret that we learned of his departure.




CHAPTER 7.

THE BRITISH WITHDRAWAL AND GERMAN ATTACK, 28th MARCH, 1918.


By the end of December, 1917, rumours began to circulate regarding a
great German offensive. Everyone had to sleep with their clothes on,
all troops, even in the reserve billets in Arras, had to "stand to"
before sun rise every morning until orders to "stand down" were
received from Brigade. Sleeping in your clothes is never comfortable
or refreshing. Practically every night large working parties had to be
sent up to the trenches, often not returning till the early hours, so
that shortly after the men had got comfortably settled down they had
to get up again and "stand to" fully equipped ready to move. This
"stand to" often lasted several hours. The advantage, therefore, which
was supposed to be had in the rest billets was much discounted.

We were fated once again to spend our New Year in the trenches, but on
the 2nd of January we were relieved by 2nd Guards Brigade. We had done
our best to make the trenches as clean as possible in order that they
might take over a system worthy of the Guards. It is satisfactory to
know that the G.O.C. Guards Division informed the G.O.C. 15th Division
that he had never had such a satisfactory take over as on this
occasion from the 15th (Scottish) Division. It was doubtful if some of
the men appreciated the hard fighting qualities of the Guards Brigade,
looking upon them as show troops. This is exemplified by a story of a
rather dirty Jock who was baling mud out of a trench. One of the
splendid clean Guardsmen, who had come up as orderly with some
officers, tried to get into conversation with him by remarking that
they were coming up to relieve them. The muddy Jock asked him, "Who
are ye?" and he replied, "Oh, we are the Guards," and the Jock,
proceeding with his digging, rejoined: "Ah! weel! ye can write hame
an' tell yer mither ye've seen the sodjers."

On relief the Battalion went into billets in the Ecole des Jeunes
Filles. Here on the 9th and 10th the Battalion had their Christmas
dinners, which were a great success and much enjoyed. During the
proceedings the C.O. addressed the troops and gave a brief review of
the operations which the Battalion had taken part in during the past
year, also the new honours they had won for the regiment. He wished
them all the best of luck for the coming year. We must record the very
great kindness and assistance shewn us by Mademoiselle G. Marmier, who
always did all she could to add to the comforts of the troops. On this
occasion she made many fine paper flowers to decorate the Christmas
dinner tables with. After the dinners the men were entertained in the
theatre, where "the Jocks," our Divisional troupe, performed the
pantomime "Robinson Crusoe."

The weather was now very cold, in fact when we handed over to the
Guards the ground was deep in snow. On the 23rd February we carried
out a small raid on the enemy's trenches at 3.30 a.m. The party
consisted of 28 other ranks of "A" Company under command of 2nd Lieut.
A. R. M'Donald. The raid proved a success. The German trenches were
found to be unoccupied, but 4 men were caught in a sap head, one of
whom was killed and 3 brought back as prisoners, so we succeeded in
getting the identification which was required. Our casualties were
nil. For this we received the congratulations of both the Corps and
Brigade Commanders.

We now fully expected an attack by the Boche, and everyone was kept on
the strain, working hard in preparing belts of wire and improving
trench systems. For many weeks neither officers nor men had their
clothes off, and the work in the reserve area was almost as strenuous
as in the front line. We knew that the Germans had been successful
further south, and we were holding what was becoming an acute salient.
One can quite understand the nervousness of those behind the line, but
those in the front areas were confident of their powers to resist the
Boches and in the strength of the defensive systems. On the occasion
when the Guards relieved us one of their officers was much impressed
with the serious spirit with which he found the Staff behind the line
treating the matter. After going round the front line, however, he
remarked that the cheerfulness of the troops had put new heart into
him.

Indeed, the front line troops (probably in their ignorance) treated
the anxiety of those behind with a good deal of levity. An amusing
method of dealing with the rumours flying around called the
Thermometer game was invented. This consisted in assigning so many
degrees or marks to the person reporting a "windy" story according to
its source. Whoever got 100 degrees first won. For instance, a
terrible story from the cook's mate or transport men was valued at
about 10 points; from a brigade-major about two, and a higher staff
officer about one.

The Staff, it is to be feared, did not appreciate this chaff, and
orders were issued that Regimental Officers were not to refer to the
Staff as having the "wind up," as they were only taking necessary
precautions. However, it shewed the troops were in good spirits.

On the evening of the 22/23rd of March we were surprised to receive an
order that we were to withdraw with all stores to the Army line, the
movement to be completed by 3 a.m. The Battalion happened to be
occupying La Fosse Farm with the caves below, and also the strong
points. We had, therefore, a considerable amount of ammunition, etc.,
in the part of the line held by us. Further, we were instructed to
guard our right flank carefully. As we knew that the enemy had driven
in the line further south of us, this warning was appreciated. "D"
Company, who were occupying Fork, Spade, and Gordon Trenches, were to
be left behind to fight the rear guard actions when the Boche
discovered we had withdrawn. O.C. "D" Company also had orders to
destroy the Headquarters dug-out at Crater Subway, and the electric
lighting plant in the Fosse Farm was to be rendered unworkable. Over
and above this, R.E.'s were to blow a mine placed under the Cambrai
Road.

As soon as it was dark motor lorries and vehicles of all descriptions
were brought up to the farm, and we at once started loading them.
Luckily for us there was a Y.M.C.A. Canteen in the caves, the officers
in charge of which left it when they heard we were retiring. The C.O.,
taking advantage of this, allowed every man who brought down a box of
ammunition from the strong points to help himself to cigarettes. With
this encouragement, men carrying ammunition came back in quick
succession, and by the time we finally retired, about 3.30 a.m., all
ammunition trench stores, etc., with the exception of a few gum boots,
had been loaded and withdrawn.

It was difficult to understand how the Boche did not hear the noise of
the retiral. If he had done so, and had trained his guns on the
Cambrai Road, he would have caused endless confusion and casualties.
The road was simply packed with motor lorries, guns and vehicles of
all descriptions, with the retiring infantry dodging in and out
between them. The congestion was extremely bad at the cross roads at
Tilloy, where the different streams of traffic met. While recognising
that this movement was necessary from a military point of view, still
it was hard to persuade the men to see this, almost as difficult as it
is for anyone who was not there to realise their disappointment and
surprise. They had worked hard for months in preparing this position.
They had carried up tons of wire and constructed belts of it many
yards wide. They now felt all this work had gone for nothing.
Supremely confident that they would have held this position against
all odds, they regretted that they had not an opportunity of proving
it. They evidently did not appreciate the dangers of an exposed flank.
We got into our new position shortly before sunrise, and from there we
could see our artillery, in the morning light, still getting back
their guns, but the enemy was not even then aware of the movement.

We knew that an attack by the Germans was almost inevitable. All
preparations possible were being made, and it was easy to understand
the importance of the orders that the ground we held must be "held at
all costs." While it is true that there were many defensive lines
behind us, right back almost to the sea, yet we believed that there
were practically no troops in our immediate support to man them, so
that, if the Boche once more broke through us, it was likely to prove
a disaster. Furthermore, if our position was lost the enemy would
outflank Vimy Ridge, which would probably necessitate our withdrawing
from it. We had gone through a long spell of hard work in the
trenches, and had been kept in a state of suspense for several months
without a chance of ever getting our clothes off. The men, however,
were in good fettle, but the Battalion contained a number of young
lads from 18½ to 19, who had been sent out in drafts in the early
Spring. They had not been proved in battle or seen any action, and it
was impossible to say how they might act, although we had every
confidence in them.

On the evening of the 27th March the Brigadier visited our Battalion
Headquarters with the joyful news that it looked as if the Boche had
given up the idea of attacking us meantime, as he was moving his guns
from their battery positions, presumably with the intention of taking
them somewhere else. Unfortunately this conclusion proved wrong, for
in reality they must have been taking their guns out to move them into
position for the attack. When the Brigadier left, the C.O. went round
the front line with the good news. He remained in the front line till
about 2 a.m. Just as he was leaving, a post reported that a short time
earlier they had discovered a party of Boche in front of our wire,
apparently cutting it. They had been driven off with a Lewis gun, and
had not been seen since. On examining the wire, which was a fairly
broad belt, there were certainly signs that this had been their
intention.

About 3 a.m. on the 28th, the enemy opened an intense bombardment on
our front and immediate support lines, using gas shells on the left
Company's front, south of Cambrai Road. This had lasted for about half
an hour, when the bombardment was moved on to the back area, including
the town of Arras. It was learnt afterwards that this was largely
composed of gas shells. About 4 a.m. the bombardment of the front line
having become less, the officer on duty patrolled the whole of the
left Company's front up to the Cambrai Road, afterwards returning to
the right, when he reported that the whole Company were standing to.
There had been a fair number of casualties. Once again our front was
heavily bombarded, mostly with trench mortars. This bombardment was
exceedingly severe, especially on the left, south of the Cambrai Road.
The N.C.O. who was on duty (the officer on duty having been killed)
stated afterwards that he had again tried to patrol his front, but
found the trenches so flattened that it was hard to say where they had
been, and the ground resembled a ploughed field. He believed nearly
everyone in this sector was either killed, buried or wounded.

At 5.15 a.m. the enemy again put down a very intense trench mortar
barrage on the left, which probably killed any men left in the front
trench south of the Cambrai Road. At the same time the enemy could be
seen jumping from shell-hole to shell-hole in front of Le Fosse Farm.
We now fired S.O.S. signals, and opened rapid fire on the enemy. On
the centre of our front line the enemy were about 100 yards away in
front of the wire. The men in this part of the line afterwards stated
that they were still confident that they could hold them up. Suddenly,
however, it was seen that the enemy were working round our flank. An
attempt was at once made to form a flank defence, but the casualties
had been so great that this was found impossible, and practically no
officers were left. Those remaining, therefore, had to fall back
rapidly. So quickly did the enemy come round the flank that the
signallers and others in the advance Battalion Headquarters (old 44th
Brigade) were not able to get out in time to escape.

The extreme right of the Battalion had also been severely shelled
along with the left of the 3rd Division. Here, too, the enemy broke
through. From the Battalion Headquarters we now saw the lines of the
3rd Division front being driven back, and shortly afterwards our own
men were seen retiring. The officer on the right had thrown back a
platoon to try and form a flank defence, but soon found the enemy
working round his rear and forcing him to withdraw. The withdrawal was
carried out in an orderly fashion, a covering fire being kept up with
Lewis guns and rifles, the men behaving splendidly, which says a lot
for their morale, as by this time most of the officers had been
killed, and it must be remembered that many of the men were young
recruits who had just come through their first experience of a
hurricane bombardment.

At no time was the shelling so severe on the centre of our line as it
was on the flanks. It is more than probable that the bombardment was
so withering that the men on the flanks were wiped out before the
enemy attacked. This seems to be proved by the fact that no officer or
man belonging to the three platoons on the left or the platoon on the
right, and only 1 man of the next two platoons, returned; in other
words, only 7 men returned out of 6 platoons. The smoke and dust were
such, however, that no one could see more than a few yards, and in any
case it was impossible for us to see what was occurring to the north
of the Cambrai Road, as at this point it is raised by an embankment.

The front line Companies Headquarters were in machine gun nest
dug-outs in front of our wire. They were rushed early in the attack.
No-man's-land certainly was a bad place for Company Headquarters, but
there was no better location available. By 8.15 a.m. we had formed a
new front line running north along the switch line, being in touch
with the 8/10th Gordons on our right and the 6th Camerons on our left.
By this time there were probably not more than 150 other ranks and 3
Company officers remaining. As, however, the 6th Camerons were on our
left, some of the men naturally got intermixed with them. The
Battalion Headquarters were by this time in the front line, and all
the Headquarter officers and men were used in the defence of the line.
It was one of the advantages of having the Battalion Headquarters
worked more or less on the principle of a Company, that this was so
easily carried out: each Headquarter officer had his own section of
men, and the men knew under whose command they had to place themselves.

The C.O. now consulted with Captain Wood, commanding the Company of
the 8/10th Gordons, who at once took in hand the collection of
ammunition, which was rather short in the new trench, from the dump at
Shamrock Corner and the old trench systems. This distribution was
successfully carried out. It is only right that we should refer to the
splendid assistance given to us by Captain Wood. He was one of the few
remaining officers who came out with the Division. He therefore had a
wide experience in fighting, and shewed as usual that coolness,
disregard for danger, and sound judgment with which we all associate
him.

After the consultation the C.O. decided to try and counter-attack the
enemy and establish a line along the old support trench in the Brown
Line. We sent off messages asking for artillery support for 9.30 a.m.,
when we proposed making the counter-attack. We could not get Brigade
on the 'phone, the wires having probably been cut. We sent off
pigeons, but the bombardment had been too much for them, and it was
only after considerable amount of stone throwing that we got them to
fly at all. We sent messages also with the buzzer set, but the
annoying thing about both pigeon and power buzzer messages is, that
one never knows whether they have been received or not. The artillery
support never came, and we held back the counter attack till 10.30, as
we did not wish to advance in case we should walk into our own fire.
As a matter of fact not one of our messages ever got through.

About 10.30 a.m. the C.O. received a message from the O.C. "A" Company
6th Camerons, who were on our left, stating that his flank was now in
the air, and that the enemy were as far back as Feuchy Chapel
Crossroads on his left and rear, and he asked what he should do.
Instruction were sent him to try to form a flank defence so as to get
in touch on his left, but to hold his ground at all costs whatever
happened. This information definitely decided us to give up the idea
of counter-attacking. In order to get a clear idea of the situation,
the C.O. went along the front line to the 6th Camerons, and found they
were holding the front in good strength. There was not much doing in
their immediate front, but evidently some of the enemy had penetrated
along the Cambrai Road to their left rear. Three Vickers gun teams
which were in the trench were instructed to get into position where
they could defend the flank, if necessary. On returning to the
Battalion he ordered a certain number of men to get back into the
strong points directly behind the line, and thus increased the depth
of our defence.

About 1 p.m., as the line was now well organised, the Headquarters
were withdrawn to those of the 8/10th Gordons. The instructions issued
previously were that if the front line went the Headquarters were to
withdraw immediately. As it turned out, however, it was not possible
to withdraw the Headquarters earlier, as they had to be used in the
defence of the line. Almost as soon as we arrived (1.30 p.m.) orders
were received that the whole line was to be withdrawn to the "Army"
line, and instructions were sent forward accordingly. Orders
afterwards came through that we were to hold the position we had, but
by the time they arrived we had already moved back. The Headquarters
were again withdrawn to those of the Reserve Battalion (8th
Seaforths), and shortly afterwards we withdrew the Battalion to some
old trenches. Lieut. Gibb, however, and a few men remained with the
8/10th Gordons, and during the afternoon this party accounted for many
casualties amongst the enemy by sniping them with the Lewis gun which
had been attached to Headquarters. At 1 o'clock in the morning we
received orders that what remained of the Battalion were to go back
and join the Transport at Wanquetim. We could not muster more than 30.
Only one Company Officer got back. Some more men came in next morning,
but the total number that returned from the fight never reached 100.
Luckily, several officers and men who had been left out at the
transport line form a nucleus round which to reconstruct the Battalion.

To sum up: the enemy's barrage fire successfully annihilated our right
and left flank, the evident intention being to surround those left in
the centre. All the officers of the front Company being casualties,
the line was methodically withdrawn under N.C.O.'s. The support
Companies had more or less the same experience. No officer or other
rank returned from the platoons on the flanks, and out of the 4
Companies 1 officer and about 150 other ranks returned to the switch
line. The men at all times shewed a good fighting spirit. The rapid
fire, together with the subsequent sniping which was brought to bear
on the enemy must have caused him heavy casualties. It was noticed
early in the fight that the enemy brought up a light gun with pack
animals. He also mounted several machine guns, which caused heavy
casualties when the line was withdrawn from the switch line. The total
casualties for the day were:--

 Officers, 3 killed, 3 wounded, 10 missing.
 Other Ranks, 1 killed, 72 wounded, 299 missing.

The number of officers and other ranks returned as killed and wounded
is small, but most of the missing turned out afterwards to be either
killed or wounded.

During this fighting our Medical Officer, Captain A. C. Bateman, M.C.,
was killed. Among personalities connected with the Battalion there was
none more striking or lovable than "the Doc." Posted in the early
months of 1916, he served continuously with us until the fateful 28th
March, 1918, when he was reported as having been wounded and taken
prisoner by the enemy. As no more was heard of him after that date it
can only be inferred that he succumbed to his injuries, and gave up
his brave life in the service of his country. As a Battalion Medical
Officer he was unrivalled, and his ability in diagnosis and treatment
was widely commented on by all ranks. Sympathetic and kindly to "lame
dogs," and to the "nervy," he was a terror to "lead-swingers."
Providence seemed to have endowed him with a special faculty for
discovering these. In a battle he was ever in the thick of things
doing his duty, and more than his duty. It therefore gave high
satisfaction in all quarters when he was awarded the Military Cross in
recognition of the gallantry and efficiency he displayed at Ypres in
July, 1917.

But all who knew him will think of him first as the best of
comrades--a very prince of good fellows. His rich Hibernian humour,
his infectious laugh, his droll ways were unfailing medicaments for
weary men, and in every social gathering he was the life and soul of
the company. One wonders if the French War Office has it on record how
two British doctors who had been enjoying Paris leave, and were in
danger of being late in rejoining their units, solemnly presented
their compliments to the Minister of War, along with a polite request
that they might without delay have the use of a car to take them to
Albert. On the request being acceded to that dignitary was warmly
shaken by the hand, and assured that no want of his, if made known to
them, would go unsupplied! Such was Bateman. Irrepressibly gay when
all around him was dismal and difficult, he brought sunshine into our
lives, and as often as men of the 7th Battalion meet together his name
is sure to be mentioned in terms of affectionate praise.

The engagement was probably the heaviest fight the Battalion ever took
part in. One realised the difference between attacking and being
attacked. We felt all the horrible uncertainty as to what would be the
result of the next move by the enemy. We believed there was
practically no one between us and the sea, and that we had to hold the
position at all costs. Nobly did the officers and men carry out these
instructions. Unfortunately, as was proved later, practically all the
missing were never heard of again, only some 50 or 60 were accounted
for as prisoners, and most of these were wounded.

We know now, through General Ludendorf's _Memoirs_, that it was the
failure of the German Divisions at Arras that brought their big
offensive to a standstill. It is interesting to read his description
and to note how it coincides with our experience. He states:--

 "At the shortest range the artillery was to be supplemented by trench
 mortars. After a short artillery bombardment, lasting only a few
 hours, the infantry should advance to the assault. This short
 artillery preparation was expected to paralyze the enemy's artillery
 by means of gas spread over a large area and to keep his infantry in
 their dug-outs. At the beginning of the assault the artillery, while
 continuing to keep down that of the enemy, was to put down a barrage
 in front of the infantry and pave a way for it like a giant roller.
 The infantry had to keep close up to this wall of projectors. The
 enemy, who would come out of his dug-out after the barrage had
 passed, would be, surprised by our infantry, assisted by 'auxiliary'
 or companion arms under the protection of artillery.... We had 20 to
 30 more Divisions than the enemy. We thought of carrying out the
 attack with 50 or 60 Divisions. The Army had thrown off its
 depression. Morale was completely restored, and we intended starting
 a War movement. If the blow at the centre succeeded the strategic
 results might indeed be enormous, as we should separate the bulk of
 the English Army from the French and crowd it up with its back to the
 sea.... The 17th Army was to capture the decisive heights East and
 North of Arras. I attached the greatest importance to this attack, to
 have the high ground in our possession was bound to be decisive in
 any fighting in the plain of the Lys. In spite of employing
 extraordinary masses of artillery and ammunition, the attack of the
 17th Army on both banks of the Scarpe was a failure."

To shew the amount of artillery sometimes used, apart from trench
mortars, he states in another place:--

 "In the offensive battle it was necessary to bring up a 100 guns to
 each kilometre (1100 yards) of front."

The following day the C.O. received the following letters:--

 "MY DEAR COLONEL,

 "A hurried line to tell you that, while I feel most keenly your heavy
 losses, I cannot sufficiently express to you my humble thanks for the
 gallantry and devotion shewn by your Battalion yesterday under your
 leadership. If you have a moment, let me know any details of losses.
 I cannot come to see you, or, needless to say, I would. I may say
 that the Corps C.O. says the Division has, it is hoped, saved Arras,
 and I know that the 7th Cameron Highlanders bore the hardest share of
 the fight.

 "Yours ever,

 "H. L. REED."

From the G.O.C. 44th Brigade:--

 "MY DEAR COLONEL,

 "I wish to send my sincerest congratulations and to thank you, and
 all ranks under your leadership, for the grand work done during the
 whole of this last tour of two months, which culminated in the
 gallant fight put up by your Battalion on the 28th, and I consider
 that it was entirely due to this fight that the 15th Division was
 practically saved from destruction, or, at any rate, an ignominous
 retreat. I would like you to convey to all ranks of your Battalion my
 sincerest sympathy with them in the great struggle. The Divisional
 Commander to-day, in expressing his thanks for the work of the 44th
 Brigade, in all sincerity told me that your work has saved Arras.

 "Yours very sincerely,

 "EDWARD HILLIAM."

Copy telegram G.O.C. XVII. Corps to G.O.C. 15th Division, dated 29th
March:--

 "I knew you could be relied on to stick it out to the end. There are
 fresh troops now in support of you, but I want the honour of holding
 Arras to be yours alone."

The Battalion was now reduced in numbers to one Company, made up
mostly from the reserves at the Transport lines which had been left
out of the trenches. Consequently we had one Company of the 9th
Gordons attached to us, and three days later (1st April) we were again
holding the trenches in rear of the intermediate Army line, which we
started to put in a state of defence. We soon received drafts, which
began to increase our strength, but there were no officers with them.
One fully realises the difficulties with which the Staff had to
contend, and the last thing anyone wants to do is to reflect in any
way on their hard work and wonderful organisation. At the same time,
we feel that the system of posting officers and men at the Base was
not the best that could have been devised. This was brought home to us
on this occasion. We were very short of officers, and on the Division
asking for drafts we were informed that there were no Cameron officers
available, and that if we insisted on having officers we would have to
take them from other units, a thing the C.O. always objected to.
Within a few days we received a letter from an officer with the home
Battalion who was anxious to try and get re-posted to the 7th. In his
letter he stated that there was such an enormous number of officers
with the Reserve Units they could hardly find room to put them all up!
The letter was brought to the notice of the Division, and the result
was that in a very short time we had a draft of Cameron officers on
their way to us.

On the 26th the Brigade was relieved by the 176th Brigade, and we
withdrew to Berneville, via Dainville and Warlus, in motor lorries. We
were now leaving the 17th Corps area, and the following communication
was received from the Corps Commander addressed to the C.O.C. 15th
Division:--

 "I wish to express to you and all ranks in the Division my great
 regret at your departure from the 17th Corps, in which you have been
 incorporated for many months, and I had hoped that we might have seen
 the battle through together. That, however, is not to be, and I only
 hope that the fortune of war may some day bring us together again.
 The Division has a great reputation, and may well be proud of it. I
 know that the honour of Scotland is safe in its keeping, and that
 those now serving will prove themselves worthy of those men who have
 won glory for the Division in the past. I wish you all good luck and
 success from the bottom of my heart.

 "CHARLES FERGUSON,

 "Lieut.-General Commanding 17th Corps."

On the 26th we moved by motor bus to Auchel. On the 1st May the G.O.C.
inspected the Battalion and presented medals. In a short address to
the Brigade he thanked all ranks for their work and devotion to duty
while in the Arras sector, and dwelt particularly on their splendid
work on the 28th in repelling the German attack. The following was
sent from the G.O.C. 44th Brigade to O.C. 7th Camerons:--

 "I wish to thank you and all ranks of your Battalion for their
 excellent behaviour and smart appearance the whole time we have been
 in billets in Auchel. I think it will be very gratifying to you to
 know that the Divisional Commander, during the parade yesterday, told
 me that he considered the 44th Brigade the best command in France,
 and that he had never seen smarter or cleaner men in any village
 during the war than the 7th Cameron Highlanders. I would like you to
 notify all ranks of the Divisional Commander's high appreciation of
 their successful efforts to keep up the credit of the 44th Brigade.

 "EDWARD HILLIAM,

 "Brigadier-General."




CHAPTER 8.

AMALGAMATION OF 6th AND 7th CAMERON HIGHLANDERS.


On the 4th of May the Brigade moved to the 17th Corps Area. The
Camerons proceeded by march route to Calonne-Ricouart, where they
entrained and proceeded to Acq. From here they proceeded to "Y" huts,
Etrun, by march route, the transport moving by road. On the 6th we
proceeded into support camps. We spent our time between the front
lines and the reserve camps up to the 10th of June, when we were
withdrawn back once more into Arras. These support camps, Collingwood,
Trafalgar, and Portsmouth, were originally constructed by the Naval
Brigade, who made a very fine job of it. They were, however, now under
observation by the enemy, and we were shelled now and again. We
luckily sustained no casualties in them, but some of the other
battalions were not so fortunate.

At times we also occupied the huts built on the side of the railway
embankment. These were very comfortable, for, being on a steep slope,
they were always dry, and it was almost impossible for the enemy to
hit them. We were also bivouacked beside the old ponds and gardens of
Blangy Park. The weather was very warm, and both officers and men
thoroughly enjoyed another spell of bathing and basking in the sun.
The scene had the appearance of some picture by an old master with its
tall trees, grassy banks and sunny pools, where naked gods reclined
and bathed. Sometimes a shell would fall amongst us, but luckily they
never did any harm, as they generally hit the water or buried
themselves in the soft ground. The next occupants, however, received
more attention from the Boche, and were inclined to blame us for too
much movement. The true cause of this was not our movements, but the
fact that a battery of artillery was brought up into the woods near
the ponds before we left.

During one of our spells in the trenches about this time we removed a
large gun from a German concrete battery position in the front area,
which had been captured during the Battle of Arras. All the work had
to be done at night by hand labour, and as the gun was a considerable
weight it was some job, but we finally got it out and towed it back
over the grass. It is a peculiar old French gun made of brass. It had
been rebored by the Germans and fitted with a 5.9 tube. We finally got
it sent home as a trophy along with its carriage. We were asked to
lend it to the War Trophy's Exhibition in London, but decided instead
to present it to the town of Inverness, as the capital of the
Highlands, and also as a proof that we had not forgotten the many
kindnesses the Battalion received there before it came out, and there
it now lies.

On going back into Arras we received with much regret the information
that, owing to the shortage of men and recruits, a large number of
units were to be amalgamated. As we were the Junior Battalion of the
Cameron Highlanders, it was decided that we should unite with the 6th
Battalion. It is hardly necessary to say that this news was very far
from welcome, not that we had anything against the 6th, but because
the 7th Battalion, which had made such a name for itself, was to cease
to exist. It was decided by the G.O.C. Division that the O.C. of the
7th Battalion should take over the command of the 6th, and he also
gave permission for him to transfer what officers and men he might
desire. This was a great concession, as originally the order had been
that only the deficiencies in officers and men of the Senior Battalion
should be made up. The decision was a sound one, as by this means a
splendid Battalion was constructed.

The remains of the 7th Battalion were to be made into a training
Battalion for the American Army. It was, therefore, possible for
officers and men, who were either war worn or had seen a considerable
amount of fighting, and deserved a rest from the fighting area, to be
sent with the training cadre. This left a large number of officers and
men to be disposed of, and it was no easy task to decide whom to keep
and whom to let go. The C.O. was much touched with the devotion and
loyalty to the Battalion shown by many. Wherever he went he would be
waylaid by anxious applicants, who would beseech him to keep them,
some even with tears in their eyes, for, although it was promised that
any who might be sent to the base would be kept as drafts for the
Camerons only, still they had had so many experiences of similar
promises they did not believe it. Their disbelief proved eventually to
be well founded, for many of them were finally transferred to other
units. It was a trying time. Everyone who was remaining had, so far as
possible, to put on a cheery countenance and to argue that it was all
for the best, still many of them felt the parting with old comrades
and tried friends as much as those who had to leave.

On the 10th June the C.O. said farewell to those of the Battalion
proceeding to join the 39th Cadre Division to provide a training staff
for the U.S.A. Army. It was a sad moment, which certainly he and
probably many others who were present will never forget. The
transport, of which Captain Mauchlin was so justly proud, was ordered
to proceed to the base. Many exchanges took place with friendly
transport officers in the Division, so that the transport which left
our lines for the base, under Captain Mauchlin, was transformed into a
collection of the most ordinary looking horses drawing limbers and
waggons very far short of the splendid transport of the 7th Camerons.
No sadder man left the Battalion than the transport officer. He had a
great knowledge of his work, and took keen interest in his transport,
which, by his untiring energy, had been brought to a high state of
efficiency.

The following officers were transferred from the 7th to the 6th
Battalion:--

 Lieut.-Colonel N. MACLEOD, D.S.O., to Command.
 Major R. M'F. CRAM, Second in Command.
 Captain T. ORR, M.C.
 Lieut. J. R. PARK.
 Lieut. R. A. M. MACCROSTIE.
 Lieut. R. C. HAMILTON.
 Lieut. E. J. G. GIBB, M.C.
 Lieut. S. M'D. SHAW.
 Lieut. D. STEWART.
 Lieut. D. WISHART.
 Lieut. E. P. B. CAMERON.
 Lieut. R. S. D. POLLOCK.
 2nd. Lieut. P. AUSTIN.
 2nd. Lieut. R. C. MITCHELL.
 2nd. Lieut. J. R. CRAN.
 2nd. Lieut. P. F. PRENTICE.
 2nd. Lieut. A. BANKS.
 2nd. Lieut. H. T. MACBETH.
 2nd. Lieut. M. T. H. WILSON.
 2nd. Lieut. A. KING.
 2nd. Lieut. J. HOGG, and
 383 Other Ranks.

Of these the C.O. was the only original officer who had joined in
September, 1914, and proceeded overseas with the Battalion as Captain
Commanding "B" Company. In addition to him there were about ten men
who had embarked with the Battalion in July, 1915.

Thus does the official history of the 7th Battalion come to an end. It
might be as well, however, before closing, to follow roughly the
training Battalion's movements until it was broken up, and also to
refer shortly to the doings of the 6th Battalion, which now contained
many of the 7th.

The training staff proceeded to Calais, via Hazebrouck, where they
were affiliated to the 3rd Battalion 119th Regiment A.E.F. They at
once entered upon their duties as instructors, which they carried on
up to the 2nd July, when the American Division left the area, and the
training staff moved to Veuse. Here they carried on instructional
training lectures. On the 25th they moved to Watten for the 7th Corps
Reinforcement Camps. On the 30th they proceeded to Arneke, where they
were joined by a Battalion of Reinforcements for the 51st Division,
and worked on the back area in the 2nd Army Front, the Battalion being
called the 19th Corps Reinforcement Battalion. From Arneke they went
to St. Eloi area. They occupied different camps in this area, some of
them being very bad. On the 7th, 348 other ranks, conducted by 6
officers, left for the 51st Division, and the remainder of the
reinforcements and the cadre moved into billets at La Cloche. On the
9th the remainder of the reinforcements were ordered to rejoin the
51st Division, and orders were received that what remained of the 7th
Camerons training staff had been placed at the disposal of the D.A.G.
for reinforcements. On the 12th of August orders came to return to the
39th Division to billets in Listergaux. On the 13th August
instructions were given that the 7th Cameron Highlanders training
staff should be broken up, all officers and other ranks who remained
being sent as reinforcements to the 6th Battalion, with the exception
of Lieut.-Colonel Anderson, who took over command of the 8th Seaforths
and the Adjutant and Orderly Room Sergeant, who were sent to Rouen
Base to wind up and check records, all stores being handed into
Ordnance.

Something must also be said of the 6th Battalion which, as has already
been stated, now included many officers and men from the 7th
Battalion. The amalgamation was carried out most satisfactorily. The
C.O. addressed both units separately, and made a special appeal to
both officers and men not to discuss and compare the merits and doings
in the past of the two Battalions which were now united, but to
remember that they all belonged to the same famous regiment, and that
it was up to them to pull together, and so maintain the high name
which both Battalions had already created. Everyone backed him up most
willingly, the result being that there was not a single instance of
crime arising from disputes between the men of the different
Battalions. This is all the more creditable when it is remembered that
there was considerable unpleasantness in some of the other units which
were amalgamated.




CHAPTER 9.

BUZANCY.


The 6th Battalion remained in the Arras sector till the beginning of
July, when we were at last taken out of the line. We moved back, and
it was believed that we were going to have that long rest which we so
much deserved, and to which we had been looking forward ever since we
arrived in France. We had been in the fighting area practically since
the end of the previous year, a period of about seven months, which
included heavy fighting. We were certain that we were in for a long
rest when we entrained. We steamed off south, and our hopes became
still higher as the report got about that we were going to one of the
big French training areas in the south of France. We heard it was an
ideal spot, and a health resort even before the war. However, after
steaming some distance past Amiens, the train suddenly stopped, and we
were ordered to get out and proceed to billets. Our faith began to be
shaken in the gentleman who talked about the seaside in the south. It
was still more shaken the next day when the Battalions were embussed
and proceeded in the direction of the front line.

On the 18th of July we found ourselves under the command of the 3rd
French Army. On the 19th we moved into the Montigny area, and on the
23rd we relieved the first American Division and held the left sector
of the 20th Corps. We took over the line on the night of the 22/23rd,
and received orders that we were to attack the next morning (23rd) on
the high ground on the west bank of the Criscuart at Misse. The C.O.
hurried forward in the afternoon, and had a look round the line. The
Americans had suffered heavy casualties, and the ground was strewn
with their dead. The Battalion came in that evening, and the relief
was carried out without much difficulty. There was some confusion as
to the exact location of our front line, which apparently did not
tally with that shewn by the maps taken over. However, there was no
time to make even a preliminary reconnaissance. The zero hour was
fixed for 5 a.m. The C.O. and Adjutant moved back to Brigade
Headquarters, as up to midnight no orders had been received for the
attack. The C.O.'s of the other units of the Brigade were also there.
The operation orders did not come in till about 3 a.m. There was just
time to issue the Battalion operation orders, but it was quite
impossible to instruct Company officers or others in person.

The attack commenced at 5 a.m. with the 6th Camerons on the right, the
Argylls on the left, and the Royal Scots in support. Everything went
well to begin with, although we came under very heavy machine gun
fire. Our barrage did not prove of much use, as the official front
line given to us was found to be considerably in advance of that
actually held. We advanced a considerable distance and took a sugar
factory. We had suffered severe casualties in consequence of the
barrage, leaving some German machine guns untouched. The attack took
place down a steep bluff, then across the valley (which was
intersected by a railway embankment), and the river, and up steep
rising ground on the other side. We managed to get forward fairly
well, although encountering strong opposition from the enemy. We took
the railway embankment and river, including "Sucrerie." Our left
flank, however, was in the air by this time, as we could not get into
touch with the Argylls on our left. We extended in order to try and
link up with them, but finally discovered they had come under heavy
fire and had not been able to advance. The result was that for a time
we had practically held the whole brigade front. About 6 p.m. the
enemy put down a heavy barrage and launched a strong counter-attack,
but this was successfully repulsed. We were to have attacked the
village of Buzancy on the morning of the 24th, but this was postponed.

Owing to the pronounced salient held by the Division at the
"Sucrerie," it was decided to withdraw and occupy the line of the
railway. The fighting was of an open order nature, through fields of
grain and small woods, with machine guns firing from behind hedges
instead of out of the usual trenches. On the 27th we received orders
for the Division to make an attack on Buzancy and the high ground to
the east of the village. The fighting was again severe, and ended with
our taking Buzancy. There was exceedingly bitter fighting round the
grenade works, and the enemy put up very strong counter-attacks. Owing
to the non-success of the 87th French Division on our right, we had
finally to withdraw to the line of the Chateau.

On the 30th or the 31st July it was decided that the 45th Brigade
would attack the main Soissons road from Villemontoire. About 10.45
a.m. we had more or less reached our objectives, although the others
had been slightly held up by heavy machine gun fire. Our right flank
was now in the air, as we could not get into touch with the
K.O.S.B.'s. Meantime we formed a defensive flank along the road from
the cemetery to the Soissons road. The S.O.S. went up from the 12th
Division about 2.45 p.m. and also from the original front line. A
pitiless machine gun fire was experienced from the wooded hills on the
right. Evidently the Germans had raided the 12th Division's lines, and
we heard later that they had taken some prisoners. About 10.35 a.m. on
the 2nd August strong patrols which had pushed out found that the
enemy was retiring, and we got orders to swing our right forward so as
to keep in touch with the 44th Brigade. About 3.30 p.m. the Brigade
reached the edge of the Concrois wood. At 7.50 the next objective was
given as the river Crise about Nilleblain. On the night of the 2/3rd
we were relieved by the 17th (French) Division, and on the 4th we
embussed for Leincourt.

So came to an end our tour with the French and American Armies. The
following is an interesting memo, issued by the First Field Artillery
Brigade of the American Expeditionary Force to the batteries of the
Brigade, and also special orders issued by the French Army Commanding
Officers:--

 "HEADQUARTERS, FIRST FIELD ARTILLERY BRIGADE.
 AMERICAN EXPEDITIONARY FORCE,
 U.S.A., July 22nd, 1918.

 "_Memorandum._

 "It is noted that, for the first time in history, French, British and
 American Artillery are working together under the same Command. They
 will support an attack to-morrow morning to be made by the 15th
 (Scottish) Division in line as follows:--

 45th Brigade.
 1/8th Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders (kilts).
 6th Cameron Highlanders (kilts).
 13th Royal Scots (trousers).

 46th Brigade.
 10th Scottish Rifles (trousers).
 7/8th K.O.S.B. (trousers).
 9th Royal Scots (kilts).

 In Reserve, 44th Brigade.
 4/5th Black Watch Highlanders (kilts).
 5th Seaforth Highlanders (kilts).
 5th Gordon Highlanders (kilts)."

Extract of telephone message from General Mangin, Commanding X French
Army, to G.O.C. 15th Division.

 "Le General Mangin vous charge de lire au General Reed que le succes
 d'aujourd'hui a été acheté par la conduite de tous et
 particulierement par le sarcifice des Ecossais."

Special order by General Mangin, Commanding X Army, 20 Corps d' Armee.

 Etat-Major, 3 Bureau.

 ORDER du General Mangin.

 "No 1375/3.

 "A communiquer aux troupes per tous les moyens;

 "En avant! la victoire du 1er Août achève celle du 18 Juillet et
 se termina en poursuite. Les chemins sont affreux, mais il pleut auss
 pour les Boches--Tallonnez-les, bousculez-les en dépassant les
 faibles centres de résistance où ils essaient de ralentir notre
 marche victorieuse.

 "Ce soir il faut que la Xe Armée soit sur la Vesle."

Copy of letter from G.O.C. 17th (French) Division to G.O.C. to 15th
Scottish Division.

_Translation._

 "17th Infantry Division.  27th August, 1918.

 "Mon General,

 "After relieving your Division in the pursuit on the Vesle, I
 established my Headquarters at Buzancy. I found there the traces
 still fresh of the exploits of your Scottish soldiers, and the
 officers of my staff were able to see clearly what hard fighting you
 had had to gain possession of the village, and, above all, of the
 park.

 "Wishing to leave on the spot some lasting tribute to the bravery of
 your soldiers, I entrusted to one of my officers, Lieut. Rene Puaux,
 the task of erecting there, with the material at hand, a small
 monument emblematic of the homage and admiration of my Division for
 yours.

 "This monument has on it 'a medallion' on which are inscribed
 thistles and roses, and beneath, the words:--

 '_Here the noble thistle of Scotland will flourish forever among the
 roses of France._'

 and beneath:

 '_17th French Division_
 to
 '_15th_ (_Scottish_) _Division_.'

 "This monument was erected on the highest point of the plateau, where
 we found the body of the Scottish soldier who advanced the farthest
 (on 28th July, 1918--Buzancy).

 "The photograph of this monument has appeared in the last number of
 the journal _L'Illustration_. I thought you would be glad to have a
 few copies of the photograph, which I send you herewith. They convey
 to you, together with the memories which I have kept of our short
 meeting at Vierzy, the expression of my esteem and my admiration for
 your valiant Division.

 "Will you please accept, dear General, the expression of my
sincere regards.

 "C. CASSOINS,
 "General de Division, C. CASSOINS, Commanding
 "17th (French) Division."

 [Illustration: "HERE THE GLORIOUS THISTLE OF SCOTLAND WILL FLOURISH
 FOR EVER AMID THE ROSES OF FRANCE."
 Monument erected by the 17th French Division to
 15th Scottish Division, near Buzancy, July, 1918.]

Special order by General Mangin, Commanding
10th French Army.

 Au Q. G. A.,
 5th August, 1918.

 _ORDRE GENERAL No. 343._

 _Officers, Non-Commissioned, Officers and Men of the 15th and 34th
 British Divisions._

 "You entered the battle at its fiercest moment. The enemy, already
 once vanquished, again brought up against us his best Divisions,
 considerably outnumbering our own.

 "You continued to advance step by step, in spite of his desperate
 resistance, and you held the ground won in spite of his violent
 counter-attacks.

 "Then during the whole day of the 1st of August, side by side with
 your French comrades, you stormed the ridge dominating the whole
 country between the Aisne and the Ourcq, which the defenders had
 received orders to hold at all costs.

 "Having failed in his attempt to retake the ridge with his last
 reserves, the enemy had to beat a retreat pursued and harassed for 12
 kilometres.

 "All of you, English and Scottish, young soldiers and veterans of
 Flanders and Palestine, you have shewn the magnificent qualities of
 your race: courage and imperturbable tenacity.

 "You have won the admiration of your companions in arms. Your country
 will be proud of you, for to your chiefs and to you is due a large
 share in the victory that we have gained over the barbarous enemies
 of the free.

 "I am happy to have fought at your head, and I thank you.

 "MANGIN."

The monument at Buzancy is, we believe, unique as being the only
monument raised by the French Army to British troops during the war.

We must refer to the excellent staff arrangements for bussing troops
which the French had made. Our usual experience had been that when one
was ordered to embus at a certain hour, the busses never turned up for
a considerable time afterwards. In fact, on our way down the bussing
and training arrangements were several hours behind the scheduled
time-table. With the French, however, on each occasion the busses
turned up a few minutes before the hour they were due, so that we had
no delay. We also had an officer in a motor car taking charge of the
convoy of busses. This enabled him to move about and see that no
distance was lost, also to go ahead and regulate traffic at important
cross roads. Another good arrangement they had was having one or two
empty busses at the end of each column, so that if a bus broke down it
was drawn to one side, and the men speedily transferred to an empty
bus. So the whole column was kept together.

We now moved north to the Loos sector, and it was very interesting
once more going over the old ground. We took part in the final general
advance from this area. After the Armistice we were informed that we
were one of the Divisions that had been chosen for the Army of
Occupation, and we busily prepared indents for new clothing, etc., in
order to make a good impression. It was decided, however, that the
young Battalions who had come out from home should take over this
duty. We were finally billeted in Braine le Comte. Here we instituted
a Battalion Mess. We had always been in the habit of doing this
wherever possible. No doubt many officers preferred the small Company
messes, but from a disciplinary and many other points of view the
Battalion mess had many advantages. Certainly our mess proved a great
success.




CHAPTER 10.

DEMOBILISATION.


The 6th Battalion was one of the Battalions chosen to represent the
15th Division in the march past before the King of the Belgians and
the Duke of York--the Earl of Inverness--in Brussels. We were the
guests of the town of Brussels for the three days we were there, and
everyone enjoyed their visit. The men were billeted in good houses,
and both they and the officers thoroughly enjoyed the theatres and
dancing halls. Their behaviour was exemplary, and when the Battalion
"fell in" to march home there was not a single man absent. The parade
itself was greatly spoilt by a snow storm. We also arranged for each
Company to visit the field of Waterloo, a short lecture being given
beforehand on the battle. The men displayed keen interest, especially
in the panorama on which they could see the square with the 79th. We
were all struck with the smallness of the battlefield, and the
enormous number of men that must have been crowded into this space.
The whole area would probably not have been more than a two-battalion
front in one of our late battles.

Orders were that drills were to be reduced to a minimum, and that
education classes for the men were to be started. This education
scheme, however, was not a very great success, as we never received
any supplies of books or any other material for carrying it out. The
French class proved very popular, probably because everyone wanted to
be able to converse with the inhabitants, especially the young ladies.
In order to employ the men and keep them fit, we took up athletics
very keenly. There were several good athletes who had formerly been
prize winners both in the 6th and 7th. Once again we managed to prove
ourselves the best Battalion in this respect. Every officer and man
had to belong to a team, and there is no doubt that the officers
taking a keen interest in the games made all the difference in the
results.

Our football team won both in the Brigade and Division contests, and
had a very tough fight before they were beaten in the Corps. At the
end of the first game we were all level, so we played another half
hour. As this resulted in another draw, we had a replay, which also
proved undecisive, so that we had again to play extra time, in which
both teams scored a goal. On the 3rd replay we were unfortunately
beaten by one goal to nothing. As our opponents were the Liverpool
Scottish, the defeat was somewhat softened. The match was intensely
exciting, both for players and spectators. Our cross country team was
our greatest success, winning not only the Brigade, Division, and
Corps Cups, but finally establishing themselves as "Army" Champions.
We also had a strong boxing team, which won the Brigade cup, and one
of our men was the runner up in the "Army" Championship lightweights.
In the final he was against a much bigger and stronger lad than
himself. He was all out in the third round, but he put up such a
plucky fight that the referee recommended the Committee to award him a
second prize, which they duly did.

With us, as with other units, the demobilisation caused a certain
amount of dissatisfaction, owing to the fact that the system of
demobilising by "trades" and "districts" enabled many men who had only
served a few months to get home before others who had been out for
long periods. The Cadre of the Battalion set out for home on the 7th
June. We proceeded to Inverness with the Colours, which were duly
deposited at the Cameron Depot. The Colour party was received by the
Provost and others, and played up to the Depot by the Band. The
following day Mr. Barron, brother of the late Major Barron of the 7th,
who was killed at Loos, entertained the whole Cadre to lunch, a
kindness which we all highly appreciated. We then proceeded to
Kinross, where we were finally demobilised.

The Colours of the 7th Battalion were "presented" at the Depot during
the Northern meeting in 1920 by the Duke of York, Earl of Inverness,
and Hon. Colonel of the 4th Battalion. On that day the Regiment held a
reunion parade at which many men who had formerly served in the
Battalion were present. After the presentation we all marched through
the town, the salute being taken by the Duke of York, who was
accompanied by The Mackintosh of Mackintosh, Lord Lieutenant of the
County, and Lieut.-General Sir Spencer Ewart, K.C.B. On the Sunday the
Colours of both the 6th and the 7th were marched by a Guard of Honour
to the High Church, the Parish Church of Inverness, and handed over by
Lieut.-Colonel N. Macleod, Cameron Highlanders, for safe custody, to
the Minister and Provost as representing the Session and Heritors.

So ends the history of the 7th Battalion, better known as the "Shiny
7th." They received this name because of the great care that was taken
by all ranks in their cleanliness and appearance. Even in the front
line every man polished his buttons, brushed his boots and cleaned his
equipment every day. No doubt this was irksome to a few, but the large
majority of the men took a keen pride in themselves.

The shortage of water did not prevent our men from shaving, and on
many occasions, when water could not be got, they reserved a little of
their tea for this purpose. There is no doubt about the "morale"
effect of keeping clean, and men always feel better for it. Further,
it occupied their spare time and so kept their minds from meditating
upon their unpleasant surroundings.

This is no new discovery, for one reads that when Sir John Moore
started to train men in Ireland for the Peninsular War, one of the
first things he did was to encourage the men to clean themselves and
take up athletics so as to keep them out of "pot houses" and to
increase their morale. It is also interesting to read in Ludendorff's
memoirs that one of the chief causes he assigns for the loss of
discipline and morale amongst the soldiers of the German Army was the
filthy conditions in which they had to live in the trenches, and the
impossibility of getting the men to clean themselves. Certainly, from
the appearance of prisoners, the Hun paid little attention to
cleanliness in the front line areas.

Our "Q" side also had a good deal to do with the morale, as by the
system on which we worked everything possible was done for the comfort
of the men. Men who were always detached from their companies, such as
those in the Transport lines and at Battalion Headquarters, had
N.C.O.'s told off to act as Q.M.S. for the detachment. They also had
their own cooks, and the officer in charge of them was made
responsible for their comfort and welfare. On one occasion Battalion
Commanders were called to a conference to discuss the organisation of
a Battalion with a General Officer from G.H.Q. We all went full of
wrinkles learnt from practical experience, but as soon as the first
suggestion was put forward the General got up and stated that a
Battalion must consist of four Companies of four platoons each, to
which every man and officer must belong, and he would not listen to
any discussion as to proposals for Headquarter Companies, etc. In
theory we all maintained the four Companies, yet circumstances made it
essential there should be Headquarter detachments.

Our Headquarters were divided into platoons or sections, each under an
officer, with a senior officer in command of the whole. Thus
signallers were under the Signalling Officer, runners and observers
under the Observation Officer. Each section had its own battle
position in defence of Headquarters, and "stood to" morning and
evening in these positions under the command of their officers. If
Headquarter rations had been left to the four Companies to provide,
and there had been no fighting organisation, it would have led not
only to great discomfort but to considerable danger, in the event of a
successful attack by the enemy, such indeed as that which occurred in
March, 1918. One is glad to know that this fact was generally realised
towards the end of the war by Higher Authority. It was often found
difficult for old serving soldiers, especially Q.M.'s, to change the
routine which has almost grown a part of themselves, but in the 7th
Battalion we were lucky in having able Q.M.'s, who were always willing
to adopt any scheme that was for the comfort of the men.

We cannot close these notes without stating our profound and deep
respect for the officers, non-commissioned officers and men who served
along with us in this splendid Battalion. They suffered appalling
hardships, especially in winter, living in trenches half filled with
freezing mud, often without a shelter; they performed prodigious feats
of work for long hours and for days on end; they advanced and
conquered despite the most terrible barrages, the men carrying on by
themselves after their officers and senior non-commissioned officers
had become casualties; they had, moreover, successfully withstood the
shock of one of the most terrific attacks which the Germans were able
to bring against them. Again and again the Battalion was annihilated,
but there were always plenty of recruits ready to uphold the honour of
the Regiment. As was once said of the Cameron Highlanders in another
great war: "Such troops may be annihilated, they can never be
defeated." Nothing better reflects the fine spirit of the young men of
Scotland, and their patriotic decision to defend their country at all
costs, than the fact that the heavy casualty lists proved the best
recruiting sergeant. Justly proud in the knowledge that time cannot
wither, nor the centuries deface, the glorious memory of these heroic
achievements, every officer, non-commissioned officer and man, whose
honour it was to serve with the 7th Battalion, derives his highest
pleasure and his truest satisfaction from the reflection that he
performed his duty; that he "did his best" in the most critical period
which the homeland has ever been called upon to face, and that he and
his comrades have written a golden page well worthy of its place in
the noble records of their famous and beloved Regiment, the

 "QUEEN'S OWN" CAMERON HIGHLANDERS.




HONOURS AWARDED.


_C.M.G._

 14/ 1/16     Lieut.-Col. J. W. Sandilands, D.S.O.


_D.S.O._

  3/ 6/16     Major T. L. Cunningham.
  4/ 6/17     Major Norman MacLeod.
  9/ 1/18     Captain J. A. Symon.


_M.C._

 14/ 1/16     2nd Lieut. R. R. Anderson.
 26/ 7/18     Lieut. P. Austin.
 20/10/16     2nd Lieut. W. Black.
 18/10/17     2nd Lieut. J. T. Bookless.
 26/ 9/17     Capt. A. C. Bateman, R.A.M.C.
 18/ 6/17     Lieut. J. Findlay.
 18/ 7/17     2nd Lieut. J. W. Graham.
 26/ 7/18     Lieut. E. J. G. Gibb.
 27/ 7/16     2nd Lieut. H. B. Goudie.
 26/ 9/17     2nd Lieut. R. Jardine.
 26/ 9/17     a/Capt. J. L. C. Jenkins.
  1/ 1/17     S/13232 C.S.M. A. Kidd.
  1/ 1/18     Capt. G. J. S. Lumsden.
 11/ 5/17     2nd Lieut. G. R. Morton.
 18/ 7/17     2nd Lieut. W. L. Muir-Kay.
 14/11/16     2nd Lieut. D. Moir.
 26/ 9/17     2nd Lieut. J. Miller.
  3/ 6/17     2nd Lieut. J. H. Mauchlin.
 26/ 7/18     2nd Lieut. J. M'Murray.
              2nd Lieut. J. I. M'Donald.
 22/ 4/18     2nd Lieut. A. R. M'Donald.
  7/ 4/18     Lieut. J. D. W. M'Cracken.
 20/10/16     2nd Lieut. T. Orr.
 26/ 9/17     2nd Lieut. R. B. Purdon.
  1/ 1/17     Captain W. G. S. Stuart.
 18/ 7/17     2nd Lieut. N. S. Sim.
 11/ 5/17     2nd Lieut. R. W. B. Semple.


_D.C.M._

 24/ 6/16     S/13635 C.S.M. C. L. B. Davie.
 14/11/16     S/15245 Cpl. J. Drysdale.
 18/ 6/17        5074 C.S.M. P. Fleming.
 14/ 1/16     S/13537 L./Sgt. W. C. Lamb.
  1/ 1/17     S/15857 a/C.S.M. J. Little.
 18/ 6/17     S/14241 C.S.M. J. D. M'Gill.
 14/11/16     S/13428 Sgt. J. Montgomerie.
  3/ 6/18     S/17863 Cpl. E. M'Kie.
 21/ 7/16     S/12647 a/B.S.M. A. K. Scott.
 14/ 1/16     S/13840 L./Sgt. H. Winning.
  3/ 9/18        9708 a/C.S.M. T. Yates.


_M.M. with Bar._

 18/10/17        6765 Sgt. A. Macdonald.
 18/10/17     S/14147 Sgt. M. W. Morrison.
 19/11/17     S/15565 Private J. MacLeod.
 27/ 6/18     S/14297 Sgt. A. Simpson.


_M.M._

 18/10/17     S/40965 Pte. G. G. W. Allan.
  3/ 7/17        5563 a/C.S.M. D. Anderson.
 19/11/17    S/139184 L./Cpl. J. Anderson.
 16/11/16     S/17792 Pte. J. Boyle.
  3/ 7/17     S/18090 Pte. R. Bell.
 16/11/16     S/18578 Pte. A. H. Craig.
 18/ 6/17     S/18323 Sgt. J. R. Cameron.
 18/10/17        8900 Cpl. D. Donegan.
 18/ 6/17     S/15513 L./Cpl. W. Fulton.
 10/ 4/18     S/41016 Pte. H. Finlay.
 19/11/17     S/43231 L./Cpl. J. Forsyth.
 18/ 1/18        9260 a/C.S.M. M. Grant.
 29/ 7/16     S/16816 L./Cpl. R. Gardiner.
 27/ 6/18     S/14084 Sgt. R. Grierson.
  3/11/17     S/23439 Pte. T. M'Govern.
 29/ 7/16     S/20039 Pte. J. Healy.
 27/ 6/18     S/14322 Pte. S. Hill.
 16/11/16     S/14002 Pte. W. Johnston.
 11/ 5/17     S/18641 L./Cpl. J. Kelly.
 10/ 6/17     S/22946 L./Cpl. J. B. Keiller.
 18/10/17    S/200364 L./Cpl. M. R. King.
 27/ 6/18     S/17962 L./Cpl. C. Logan.
 29/ 7/16     S/16957 L./Cpl. J. MacDougall.
 10/10/16     S/16536 Sgt. D. H. M'Gilp.
 16/11/16     S/13888 L./Cpl. J. A. M'Gowan.
 11/ 5/17     S/14069 Pte. G. M'Lean.
 18/ 6/17     S/15565 Pte. J. MacLeod.
 29/ 8/18     S/25807 L./Cpl. J. M'lntyre.
  9/12/16     S/13466 Pte. J. M'Lean.
 25/ 5/17        6765 Sgt. A. MacDonald.
 18/10/17     S/14032 L./Cpl. T. A. M'Murray.
 18/ 6/17     S/25532 Sgt. D. P. Maxwell.
 18/ 6/17     S/14147 Sgt. M. W. Morrison.
 18/10/17     S/10501 a/Sgt. T. Morgan.
 10/ 4/18     S/10391 L./Sgt. W. M'Kay.
 27 /6/18     S/12095 a/Sgt. A. M'Innes.
  2/ 7/17     S/13686 L./Cpl. W. Miller.
  3/ 7/17     S/16086 Pte. J. M'Lellan.
 18/10/17      200204 L./Cpl. J. Nicolson.
 29/ 8/18      201041 L./Cpl. T. A. Nicolson.
 18/ 6/17     S/27025 L./Cpl. R. Pringle.
 16/11/16     S/16973 Cpl. W. J. Ramage.
 18/10/17        9808 Cpl. T. Rowett.
 18/10/17     S/26863 L./Cpl. W. Ross.
 18/10/17     S/23246 Pte. J. Rose.
 29/ 8/18        7540 Cpl. T. S. Renton.
 29/ 7/16     S/13024 A/L/Sgt. G. S. Sutherland.
  8/ 8/17     S/12824 Sgt. R. F. J. Small.
 18/10/17     S/14032 L./Cpl. T. Shumacker.
 10/ 4/18    S/200542 L./Cpl. J. Stoddart.
  3/ 7/17     S/18170 Cpl. J. N. Spiers.
  2/11/17        9039 Pte. J. Spence.
 12/12/17        8983 L./Sgt. C. Smith.
 19/11/17     S/14297 Cpl. A. Simpson.
 10/10/16     S/16738 Pte. W. Train.
 16/11/16     S/21669 L./Cpl. E. B. Thomson.
 18/10/17     S/22930 Cpl. W. Taylor.
 18/10/17     S/16391 Pte. J. Tulloch.
 29/ 8/18     S/18231 Pte. J. Vickers.
 27/ 6/18     S/23992 Sgt. T. Wright.
 18/ 6/17     S/14140 L./Cpl. R. Young.


_Meritorious Service Medal._

 10/ 4/18     S/16104 L./Cpl. G. G. Black.
  1/ 1/18     S/16824 A./Sgt. R. Burton.
 17/ 6/18     S/13480 Pte. W. Lindsay.
 17/ 6/18     S/14285 L./Cpl. W. Ogston.


_Royal Humane Society Parchment for Saving Comrade's life from
drowning._

  8/ 9/17     S/23888 Pte. J. H. Ritchie.


_Mentioned in Despatches._

  1/ 1/16     Lieut. R. R. Anderson.
 24/ 2/17     S/12229 R.S.M. A. Anderson.
  1/ 1/16     S/13321 C.S.M. D. Adam.
 25/ 5/17     S/13184 L./Cpl. A. Bell.
 15/ 6/16     5651 C.S.M. J. B. Cranston.
 24/ 5/18     13436 Pte. A. C. Campbell.
 25/ 5/17     Captain A. R. Chapman.
  7/ 4/18     Major P. M'F. Cram.
 24/ 5/18     S/21667 L./Cpl. H. Fleming.
 25/ 5/17     Lieut. G. J. S. Lumsden.
 15/ 6/16     S/13901 Cpl. P. Macdonald.
 15/ 6/16     S/15814 L./Cpl. J. M'Callum.
 15/ 6/16     S/13088 Pte. A. F. Morgan.
 24/12/16   } Captain K. Macrae.
  4/ 1/17   }
  9/12/16     S/14241 Sgt. J. D. M'Gill.
 25/ 5/17     S/13241 Pte. W. Macintosh.
 25/ 5/17   } Lieut.-Col. Norman MacLeod.
 21/12/17   }
 21/12/17     2nd Lieut. J. Mackenzie.
 21/12/17     Lieut. J. H. Mauchlin.
  7/ 4/18     Lieut. J. D. W. M'Cracken.
  4/ 1/17     Captain A. Ogilvie.
 21/12/17     13866 Pte. J. Oliphant.
 25/ 5/17     S/16137 L./Cpl. J. O'Rourke.
 13/ 6/16     Lieut. J. S. Robertson.
  1/ 1/16     Lieut.-Col. Sandilands, D.S.O.
  1/ 1/16     Lieut. W. G. S. Stuart.
  2/12/17     Lieut. J. A. Symon.
 25/ 5/17     S/15620 Cpl. T. Torrance.
 15/ 6/16     S/13603 R.Q.M.S. T. F. Watson.
 25/ 5/17     13264 R.Q.M.S. J. P. W. Wilson.


_Belgian Croix de Guerre._

 12/ 7/18     S/16824 A./Sgt. R. Burton.
 12/ 7/18     R/3871 R.S.M. W. Vass.
 12/ 7/18     S/13264 R.Q.M.S. J. P. W. Wilson.
 12/ 7/18     4861 C.S.M. W. Falconer.




OFFICERS WHO SERVED WITH THE BATTALION.


ANDERSON, D. 2nd Lieut., posted 4/12/15, a/Captain 21/10/16,
transferred T.M.'s 5/2/16, killed April, 1917.

ANDERSON, R. R. 2nd Lieut., posted 8/2/15, Lieut. 18/10/15, England
for course 27/6/16, mentioned in Dispatches, M.C.

ANDERSON, J. W. 2nd Lieut., posted 12/5/16, killed 17/8/16.

AUSTIN, P. 2nd Lieut., posted 20/9/17, M.C., H.Q. "works" Officer.

AITKENHEAD, J. Lieut. and Q.M., posted 24/2/18.

BARRON, J. Captain, posted 28/9/14, Major 25/1/15, missing 25/9/15,
prisoner died of wounds.

BUCHANAN, J. F. Captain, posted 6/3/15, Adjutant, England sick
23/10/15.

BLACK, W. 2nd Lieut., posted 5/2/16, Lieut. 30/7/17, a/Captain
21/5/17-26/6/17, transferred R.F.C. 17/12/17, M.C.

BATEMAN, A. C. Captain R.A.M.C., attached 29/1/16, missing 28/2/18,
killed, M.C.

BROWN, D. M. 2nd Lieut., posted 24/8/16, wounded 9/4/17.

BROWN, T. G. 2nd Lieut., posted 24/8/16, wounded 2/1/17.

BOYD, T. C. Lieut., posted 4/5/17, a/Captain 21/5/17-6/7/17, wounded
6/7/17, died of wounds 21/7/17.

BOOKLESS, J. T. 2nd Lieut., posted 4/6/17, England 17/10/17, M.C.

BEGBIE, T. A. 2nd Lieut., posted 7/6/17, wounded 6/7/17, rejoined
7/7/17, wounded 1/8/17.

BLACK, W. D. J. Captain Rev., posted 13/8/17, Chaplain, killed
22/8/17.

BAYNES, W. A. 2nd Lieut., posted 30/9/17.

BLAIR, N. A. 2nd Lieut., posted 20/9/17.

BLAIKIE, A. Captain, posted 17/9/17, transferred London Scottish
10/10/17.

BANKS, A. 2nd Lieut., posted 29/10/17.

CAMERON, E. K. 2nd Lieut., posted 12/4/14, Lieut. 11/11/14, Captain
20/1/15, missing, 25/9/15, prisoner.

CAMERON, F. B. 2nd Lieut., posted 4/2/15, Lieut. 22/5/16, died of
wounds 19/8/16.

CAMERON, E. 2nd Lieut., posted 18/9/16, Lieut. 1/7/17, England sick
11/12/16, rejoined 19/8/17.

CAMERON, R. H. 2nd Lieut., posted 19/5/17, wounded 25/5/17.

CAMERON, E. P. B. 2nd Lieut., posted 25/4/18.

CHAPMAN, A. R. 2nd Lieut., posted 9/11/14, Lieut. 1/4/15, Captain and
Adjutant 23/3/16, transferred Staff Captain 12/5/17, mentioned.

CHAPMAN, S. E. 2nd Lieut., posted 9/11/14, missing 25/9/15, killed.

COWAN, J. C. Lieut. and Qr. Master, posted 9/9/15. Captain 17/3/16,
Acting Adjutant 23/10/15, attached 15th Division H.Q. 20/3/16.

CATTENACH, J. C. 2nd Lieut., posted 5/12/15, wounded 10/2/16.

CUNNINGHAM. Captain, posted 10/2/15, Major 18/10/15, 2nd in Command
1/4/16, a/O.C. Battalion 13/4/16-13/5/16, wounded 18/7/16, D.S.O.

CURRIE, A. A. 2nd Lieut., posted 6/4/16, Lieut. 18/1/17, Assistant
Adjutant transferred Divisional School 18/1/17.

COVENTRY, C. J. 2nd Lieut., posted 24/8/16, wounded 9/4/17.

CRICHTON, D. E. M. M. Lt. Colonel, attached 31/12/16, O.C. 18/1/17,
relinquished sick 6/5/17.

CHISHOLM, R. 2nd Lieut., posted 14/2/17, transferred Base 24/5/17.

COOPER, A. W. H. 2nd Lieut., posted 4/5/17, wounded 1/8/17.

COURTNEY, C. 2nd Lieut., posted 4/5/17, wounded 22/8/17.

CRAM, P. M'F. Captain, posted 9/8/17, a/Major and 2nd in Command
14/8/17, Major 14/9/17, mentioned.

CHISHOLM, A. 2nd Lieut., posted 14/9/17, killed 17/10/17.

COULSON, B. J. B. Major, posted 8/11/17, transferred 17th Welsh
Regiment 8/12/17.

CRAN, I. P. 2nd Lieut., posted 25/4/18.

DAVY, G. A. C. Captain, posted 4/2/15, wounded 27/9/15, rejoined
23/2/16, England sick 31/3/16, rejoined 22/9/16, wounded 9/4/17.

DREW, J. 2nd Lieut., posted 6/6/16, shell shock 18/9/16.

DAVIE, G. L. B. 2nd Lieut., posted 9/18/16, wounded 9/10/16, D.C.M.

DINWIDDIE, R. M. Lieut., posted 29/9/16, transferred B.W. 14/5/17.

DUNN, J. 2nd Lieut., posted 4/11/16, wounded 10/1/17.

DENHOLM, T. S. 2nd Lieut., posted 14/2/17, England sick 16/4/16,
rejoined 6/1/18, killed 28/3/18.

DEANS, H. D. 2nd Lieut., posted 4/6/17, wounded 13/1/17.

DICKSON, R. M. Captain Rev., posted 15/6/17, Chaplain, England sick
7/9/17.

DRUMMOND, P. 2nd Lieut., D.C.M., posted 5/1/18, missing 28/8/18,
prisoner.

DONALD, J. A. Missing 28/3/18, prisoner, wounded.

ELLIOT, J. A. S. 2nd Lieut., posted 4/6/17, wounded 28/7/17, died of
wounds.

EASTWOOD, A. J. 2nd Lieut., posted 7/10/17, England sick 26/11/17.

EDMISTON, R. H. 2nd Lieut., posted 25/4/18.

FAIRLIE, A. 2nd Lieut., posted 5/10/15, off strength 29/2/16.

FORBES, D. 2nd Lieut., posted 5/10/15, wounded 19/11/15.

FINDLAY, J. 2nd Lieut., posted 12/12/15, Lieut. 18/8/16, a/Captain
18/8/16-15/11/16 and 14/4/17-23/4/17, Captain 21/5/17, hospital
15/3/16, rejoined 16/9/16, wounded 24/4/17, rejoined 16/4/18, M.C.

FRASER, A. 2nd Lieut., posted 24/4/16, wounded 28/7/17.

FORRESTER, E. W. 2nd Lieut., posted 24/8/16, wounded 9/4/17.

FRASER, J. Captain, posted 30/9/17, England sick 1/4/18.

FINDLAY, T. N. 2nd Lieut., posted 16/9/17, killed 28/3/18.

GRAHAM, W. 2nd Lieut., posted 22/9/14, Lieut. 26/9/15, hospital sick
11/3/16.

GOUDIE, H. B. 2nd Lieut., posted 24/4/16, killed 17/8/16, M.C.

GRAHAM, J. W. 2nd Lieut., posted 10/1/17, a/Capt. 6/9/17-24/9/17,
England duty 3/3/18, M.C.

GIBB, E. J. G. 2nd Lieut., posted 12/5/17, a/Captain 25/7/17-4/2/18,
Lewis Gun Officer and a/Adjutant, wounded 28/3/17, M.C.

GIDDEN, T. 2nd Lieut., posted 7/6/17, wounded 12/3/18.

GRIEVE, W. F. 2nd Lieut., posted 20/9/17, missing 28/3/18, prisoner.

GEMMELL, S. S. 2nd Lieut., posted 20/9/17, killed 21/3/18.

GREIG, G. S. 2nd Lieut., posted 14/9/17.

GRIEVE, C. C. Major, posted 18/1/18, England sick 30/3/18.

HAIG, D. J. Lt. Colonel Commanding 8/10/14, relinquished 22/4/15.

HAMILTON, L. R. DOUGLAS. Captain, posted 18/1/15, wounded 27/9/15,
rejoined 12/5/16, transferred 20th Lanc. 7/7/16, killed.

HARDMAN, H. B. 2nd Lieut., posted 28/9/15, Lieut. 16/12/15, a/Adjutant
21/3/16, killed 17/8/16.

HOSKEN, E. D. 2nd Lieut., posted 11/8/16, wounded 11/10/16, rejoined
30/9/17, missing 17/10/17, killed.

HAMILTON, R. C. Lieut., posted 24/4/18.

HOGG, J., M.M. 2nd Lieut., posted 28/4/18.

IRVINE, A. Lieut., posted 3/11/16, a/Capt. 4/11/16-23/11/16, T/Major
and 2nd in command 25/5/17, wounded 13/8/17.

JOHNSTONE, H. B. Lieut., posted 5/11/14, Captain 1/5/15, England sick
26/11/15, rejoined 18/4/16, wounded 17/8/16.

JARDINE, R. 2nd Lieut., posted 24/8/16, wounded 11/9/16, rejoined  ,
wounded 22/8/17, M.C.

JENKINS, J. L. C. 2nd Lieut., posted 30/8/16, a/Capt. 20/7/17-22/8/17,
wounded 22/8/17, rejoined 9/5/17, M.C.

JENKINS, P. C. 2nd Lieut., posted 4/11/16, killed 9/4/17.

KIRKLAND, W. H. Lieut., posted 28/9/14, Captain 31/10/14, missing
25/9/15, assumed killed.

KAY, W. L. MUIR. 2nd Lieut., posted 12/11/16, wounded 17/5/17, M.C.

KING, A. 2nd Lieut., posted 25/4/18.

LUMSDEN, G. J. S. 2nd Lieut., posted 12/3/16, Signalling Officer
Lieut. 15/3/16, Captain and Adjutant 16/4/17, England course 15/5/18,
mentioned and M.C.

LISTER, W. D. Lieut. and Q.M., posted 4/7/16, transferred 5th Army
14/9/17.

LUEN, G. A. 2nd Lieut., posted 7/10/15, wounded 17/8/16, rejoined
25/5/18.

LAMBERT, G. 2nd Lieut., posted 24/8/16, killed 23/4/17.

LEGATE, A. D. S. 2nd Lieut., posted 24/8/16, a/Capt. 27/6/18-15/8/18,
Assistant and Act. Adjutant England, course 31/1/18, rejoined 25/5/18.

LAMONT, J. 2nd Lieut., posted 4/5/17, wounded 2/8/17.

MURCHIESON, M. 2nd Lieut., posted 5/10/15, Lieut. 25/11/15, Captain
1/3/17, wounded 17/8/16.

MIDDLETON, J. R. 2nd Lieut., posted 18/12/15, transferred R. F. C.
4/7/16.

MAUCHLIN. 2nd Lieut., posted 17/3/16, Transport Officer Lieut. 1/2/16,
Captain  , wounded 11/7/16, rejoined 10/12/16, mentioned and M.C.

MARTIN, NORMAN. 2nd Lieut., D.S.O., posted 6/5/16, transferred 1st
Camerons  /6/16, killed.

MARSH, C. H. Major, D.S.O., posted O.C. 13/5/16, a/Lt. Colonel
13/5/16, struck off strength 7/1/17.

MOIR, D. 2nd Lieut., M.C., posted 24/6/16, wounded 17/8/16, rejoined
1/4/17, wounded 14/4/17.

MILL, W. 2nd Lieut., posted 26/6/16, wounded 17/8/16.

MARTIN, D. Captain Rev., posted 24/7/16, England 14/6/17.

MORTON, G. R. 2nd Lieut., posted 7/9/16, wounded 13/10/16, killed
9/4/17, M.C.

MORRISON, D. 2nd Lieut., posted 29/9/16, England 18/11/16.

MATHIESON, J. Lieut., posted 22/2/17, England sick, 4/5/17.

MILNE, D. T. 2nd Lieut., posted 4/5/17, Lieut. 1/7/17, a/Capt.
31/8/17, missing 28/3/18 (prisoner).

MORAN, J. 2nd Lieut., posted 12/5/17, wounded 1/8/17.

MUIRHEAD, W. 2nd Lieut., posted 24/5/17, killed 28/3/18.

MILLAR, J. 2nd Lieut., posted 7/6/17, wounded 1/8/17, M.C.

MURRAY, R. M. 2nd Lieut., posted 30/9/17, England sick 3/11/17.

MITCHELL, R. C. 2nd Lieut., posted 20/9/17, afterwards killed.

M'BETH, F. H. 2nd Lieut., posted 25/4/18.

M'BEAN, H. Captain, posted 1/11/16, England sick 5/4/17.

MACRAE, K. 2nd Lieut., posted 24/10/14, Lieut. 1/6/15, Captain
18/10/16, wounded 9/9/15, rejoined 23/2/16, England sick 10/8/16,
mentioned.

M'CRACKEN, J. D. W. 2nd Lieut., posted 24/4/16, Lieut. 1/7/17, a/Capt.
2/6/17-10/8/17 and 15/2/18-7/4/18, wounded 24/12/16, rejoined 19/5/17,
wounded 6/4/18, mentioned and M.C.

M'CULLOCH, J. 2nd Lieut., posted 29/9/16, a/Capt. 21/5/17, Lewis Gun
Officer, killed 22/8/17.

M'CUISH, A. 2nd Lieut., posted 29/9/16, missing 24/12/16, prisoner.

M'CALL, E. B. 2nd Lieut., posted 12/11/16, England 14/1/17.

M'CROSTIE, R. A. M. 2nd Lieut., posted 24/4/16, Lieut. 1/7/17, England
sick 13/10/16, rejoined 19/9/17, transferred Bde Bombing Officer.

M'DONNELL, K. C. B. 2nd Lieut., posted 17/10/14, Lieut. 21/10/14,
Intelligence Officer wounded 9/9/15, rejoined 12/3/16, sick 25/5/16,
rejoined 7/6/16, England R.A.F.C. 23/7/16.

M'DONALD, S. 2nd Lieut., posted 10/3/15, killed 25/9/15.

M'DONALD, D. 2nd Lieut., posted 5/10/15, England sick 8/2/16.

M'DONALD, J. K. 2nd Lieut., posted 4/12/15, England sick 19/6/16.

M'DONALD, M. D. 2nd Lieut., posted 20/3/16, killed 18/7/16.

M'DONALD, J. I. 2nd Lieut., posted 12/11/16, wounded 22/8/17, M.C.

M'DONALD, J. A. 2nd Lieut., posted 7/6/17, missing 23/3/18.

M'DONALD, A. R. 2nd Lieut., posted 16/9/17, wounded, missing 28/3/18,
M.C.

M'FARLANE, F. 2nd Lieut., posted 5/10/15, Lieut. 16/12/15, England
sick 7/3/16.

M'INDEOR, M. N. 2nd Lieut., posted 16/9/17, Signalling Officer,
wounded 28/3/18.

MACINTOSH, J. 2nd Lieut., posted 23/10/17, England sick 5/3/18.

M'KAY, C. W. D. 2nd Lieut., posted 28/9/15, wounded and missing
17/8/16, death accepted 17/8/16.

M'KENZIE, J. K. 2nd Lieut., posted 12/12/15, Hospital sick 21/1/16,
duty 28/2/16, transferred draft Conducting Officer 6/4/16.

MACKAY, J. W. 2nd Lieut., posted 24/4/16, Lieut. 21/5/17, wounded
15/8/16, rejoined 19/5/17, wounded 1/8/17, died of wounds 20/8/17.

MACKAY, M. S. 2nd Lieut., posted 23/4/16, killed 23/4/17.

MACKENZIE, J. 2nd Lieut., posted / /17, mentioned 21/12/17.

MACKENZIE, N. B. Major, posted 14/1/17.

MACLEOD, NORMAN. Major, posted 11/2/15, 2nd in Command, appointed Camp
Commandant 8/8/15.

MACLEOD, NORMAN. Captain, posted 5/10/14, Major 1/4/16, and 2nd in
Command 1/7/16, a/Lt. Colonel O.C. Battalion 21/5/17, Lt. Colonel
12/9/17, wounded 27/9/15, rejoined 6/5/16, mentioned (twice) D.S.O.

MACLEOD, N. 2nd Lieut., posted 30/9/17, England sick 23/3/18.

MACLEOD, L. 2nd Lieut., posted 30/9/17, wounded missing 28/3/18,
prisoner.

M'LEAY, G. C. 2nd Lieut., posted 26/6/16, wounded 18/7/16, rejoined
22/7/16, killed 17/8/16.

M'LEAN, W. T. 2nd Lieut., posted 24/8/16, transferred 27th I.B.D.
14/7/17.

M'LEAN, M. N. 2nd Lieut., posted 5/10/15, Lieut. 24/11/15, wounded
23/2/16.

M'LOGHLIN, J. W. 2nd Lieut., posted 4/12/16, England 5/1/17.

M'MURRAY, J. 2nd Lieut., posted 9/8/16, England 3/11/16, rejoined
20/9/17, wounded 28/3/18, M.C.

M'MILLAN, J. K. 2nd Lieut., posted 10/1/17, wounded 9/4/17.

M'NIVEN, A. 2nd Lieut., posted 15/3/15, wounded 27/9/15, rejoined
24/3/16, wounded 18/7/16, rejoined 10/2/17, wounded 24/4/17, died of
wounds 1/5/17.

M'NAB, J. S. 2nd Lieut., posted 22/5/17, a/Capt. 24/10/17-1/11/17,
missing 28/3/18, prisoner.

M'PHERSON, D. G. 2nd Lieut., posted 28/9/15, England sick 18/5/16.

M'PHERSON, R. S. M. 2nd Lieut., posted 24/8/16, England 17/9/16.

M'EWEN, J. 2nd Lieut., posted 5/10/15, England sick 17/5/16.

M'SWEEN. 2nd Lieut., posted 5/11/15, England sick 7/5/16.

NOBLE, D. 2nd Lieut., posted 22/9/16, England 12/12/16.

OGILVIE, ALLISTER. 2nd Lieut., posted 9/11/14, Lieut. 1/4/15, Captain
31/12/15, Transport Officer wounded 17/8/16, Mentioned.

ORR, THOMAS. 2nd Lieut., posted 24/4/16, Lieut. 20/8/16, a/Capt.
11/10/16-3/11/16, Captain 21/5/17, wounded 18/7/16, duty 25/7/16,
wounded 26/1/17, rejoined 7/8/17, England sick 28/8/17, rejoined
6/4/18, M.C.

PEARSON, H. C. Lieut., posted 20/9/15, killed 24/11/15.

PURDEN, R. B. 2nd Lieut., posted 23/6/16, Lieut. 1/7/17, a/Capt.
15/11/17-2/6/18, wounded 17/8/16, rejoined 19/5/17, wounded 1/6/18,
M.C.

PARK, J. R. 2nd Lieut., posted 24/2/17, England sick 15/6/18.

POLLOCK, R. S. D. 2nd Lieut., posted 12/5/17, Lieut. 26/3/18, a/Capt.
12/4/18-12/6/18.

PRENTICE, P. F. 2nd Lieut., posted 30/9/17.

PARKER, H. L. 2nd Lieut., posted 20/9/17, England sick 22/2/18.

PROVEN, R. A. Lieut., posted 1/11/17, transferred M. G. C. 18/1/18.

RABAN, R. B. C. Captain, posted 18/11/15, Major 2nd in Command
18/11/15, posted 13th Royal Scots 1/4/16, afterwards killed.

ROWELL, H. A. Lieut, R.A.M.C., attached 1/9/15 to 28/1/16.

ROLLO, A. 2nd Lieut., posted 17/10/14, Captain 26/9/15, posted Staff
Captain 12/4/16.

ROBERTSON, J. S. 2nd Lieut., posted 5/1/15, Lieut. 26/9/15, killed
21/5/16, Mentioned.

ROBERTSON, P. H. Lieut. R.A.M.C., posted  / /15, attached 46th F.
Ambulance 1/9/15.

RUSSELL, S. C. 2nd Lieut., posted 6/5/16, wounded 9/4/17.

RUSSELL, A. Captain Rev., posted  / /15, attached Division 25/7/16.

RONALDSON, J. S. 2nd Lieut., posted 14/2/17, killed 9/4/17.

ROSS, A. M. 2nd Lieut., posted 4/5/17, England sick 9/11/17.

RENNIE, H. R. 2nd Lieut., posted 7/10/17, prisoner 28/3/18.

ROBERTSON. Lieut. R.A.M.C. attached  / /15, transferred 46th F.A.
1/9/15.

STUART, W. G. S. 2nd Lieut., posted 22/9/14, Lieut. 1/4/15, Captain
26/9/16, wounded 9/9/15, rejoined 13/9/15, killed 23/4/17, Mentioned,
M.C.

STUART, R. A. 2nd Lieut., posted 22/9/14, killed 25/9/15.

STUART, D. A. 2nd Lieut., posted 3/10/14, wounded 27/9/15, afterwards
killed.

SUTTIE, D. F. 2nd Lieut., posted 4/11/14, Lieut. M. G. Officer,
Hospital sick 12/10/15, rejoined 3/3/16, England sick 24/4/16,
rejoined 24/8/16, wounded 20/3/17.

SANDILANDS, J. W. Lt. Colonel, D.S.O., posted O.C. Battalion 22/4/15,
appointed Brigadier-General 13/4/16, Mentioned, C.M.G.

SCOTT, C. R. G. 2nd Lieut., posted 26/6/16, wounded 17/8/16, rejoined
19/5/17, wounded 22/8/17, rejoined 25/5/18.

SEMPLE, R. W. B. 2nd Lieut., posted 29/8/16, killed 9/4/17, M.C.

SIM, N. S. 2nd Lieut., posted 7/9/16, a/Capt. 25/4/17-18/5/17,
Intelligence Officer England Duty 10/10/17, rejoined 25/4/18, wounded
4/6/18, M.C.

SYMON, J. A. 2nd Lieut., posted 22/9/16, Lieut., 1/3/17, a/Capt.
12/7/17-1/8/17, wounded 27/1/17, rejoined 4/5/17, wounded 1/8/17,
Mentioned, D.S.O.

SCOTT, D. Captain, Rev., posted 28/9/17, Chaplain.

STEELE, J. R. 2nd Lieut., posted 26/8/16, shell shock 11/10/16.

SMYTH R. 2nd Lieut., posted 7/10/17, missing 28/3/18.

SHAW, S. M'D. Lieut., posted 20/4/18.

STEWART, D. Lieut., posted 25/4/18.

SINCLAIR, J. A. Lieut., posted 19/2/17, England sick 23/4/17.

SMITH, J. FRASER. 2nd Lieut., posted 14/2/17, killed 9/4/17.

SINCLAIR, I. A. 2nd Lieut., posted 25/4/18.

SABISTON, J. A. 2nd Lieut., killed 22/8/17.

SMITH, R. 2nd Lieut., posted 4/10/17, prisoner 28/3/18.

TAYLOR, E. G. 2nd Lieut., posted 5/1/15, killed 25/9/15.

TIMLINE, G. B. 2nd Lieut., posted 14/10/15, England shell shock,
9/2/16.

TAYLOR, D. 2nd Lieut., posted 9/5/15, missing 17/7/16, prisoner died
of wounds 1/9/16.

THOMSON, J. 2nd Lieut., posted 10/1/17, England sick 31/2/17.

TELFORD, T. G. 2nd Lieut., posted 4/5/17, Lieut., 26/4/18, England
sick 29/4/18.

WATT, B. H. 2nd Lieut., posted 15/3/15, killed 25/9/15.

WALLACE, C. D. K. 2nd Lieut., posted 25/10/15, Hospital sick 7/11/15.

WELSH, C. G. 2nd Lieut., posted 24/1/16, killed 29/4/16.

WATT, T. D. G. 2nd Lieut., posted 24/8/16, wounded 3/4/17.

WALLACE, A. R. 2nd Lieut., posted 22/9/16, England 23/12/16.

WALKER, H. P. W. 2nd Lieut., posted 10/1/17, killed 23/4/17.

WHITE, D. M'L. B. 2nd Lieut., posted 10/1/17, England, wounded 3/5/18.

WISHART, D. Lieut., posted 25/4/18.

WEDDERSPOON, G. Lieut., posted 25/4/18, wounded 1/6/18.

WILSON, N. J. R. 2nd Lieut., posted 25/4/18.

YOUNG, W. 2nd Lieut., posted 4/8/17, killed 22/8/17.




EXTRACTS FROM WAR DIARY.


1915

 July 4--Parkhouse Camp     Received orders to embark for
                            France.

 July 8--   do.   do.       Advance party embarked on s.s.
                            _Inventor_ for Havre via Southampton.

                            Battalion embarked at 11.50 p.m.
                            on s.s. _Arundel_ for Boulogne
                            via Folkestone.

 July 9--Boulogne           Disembarked and proceeded to
                            rest camp. Marched to Pont des
                            Briques.

 July 10--Houlle            Joined by advance party and
                            proceeded to Watten by train.
                            9.45 a.m. Billets at Houlle.

 July 12--   do.            Inspected by Field Marshal Sir
                            John French.

 July 15--Hazelbrouck       Marched at 6.30 a.m. to Hazelbrouck,
                            arrived 4.30 p.m. 19 miles.

 July 16--Gonnehem          Marched at 8 p.m. to Gonnehem
                            via St. Venant and Busnes, arriving
                            at 3.30 p.m.

 July 17--   do.            Marched at 8 p.m. to Houchin,
                            via Chocques, Le Perlecques, and
                            Vaudricourt, arriving 12.15 a.m.
                            (18/7/15).

 July 18--Houchin           Marched at 9 p.m. to Les Brebis
                            via Mazingarbe, arrived 12 midnight
                            less sick and details. Reported to
                            C.R.E. Indian Cavalry Division.

 July 19--Les Brebis        Found work party (300 from A
                            and D Coys.).

 July 20--   do.            Found work parties from A, B,
                            C and D Coys.

 July 22--   do.            First casualty 14176 Pte. V. A.
                            Telfer (wounded).

 July 24--Houchin           Marched at 9 p.m. from Les Brebis.

 July 28--   do.            A and B Coys. proceeded to trenches
                            for two days' tour under 142
                            Brigade.

 July 30--   do.            A and B Coys. relieved by C and
                            D Coys.

 Aug. 2--Sector W. I.       A and B Coys. and H.Q. joined
                            C and D Coys. in Sector W.I.,
                            relieving 142 Brigade on the
                            extreme right of the British lines:
                            A Coy. right and B Coy. left,
                            C support and D reserve. Battalion
                            H.Q. South Maroc.

 Aug. 6--South Maroc        Battalion relieved by 8th Seaforths.
                            Found working parties 400 strong.

 Aug. 10--Mazingarbe        Relieved by 8th K.O.S.B.'s 46
                            Brigade. A and B machine guns
                            left in Keeps. Found work parties.

 Aug. 18--Sector X2         Relieved by 7th R.S.F. and we
                            relieved 6th Camerons in Sector
                            X2.

 Aug. 26--Mazingarbe        Relieved in trenches by 10th
                            Gordons taking over area C from
                            9th Black Watch.

 Aug. 30--Noeux les Mines   Relieved 11th A. and S. H. in
                            billets. Finding working parties
                            (300).

 Sept. 7--Trenches          Marched at 5 p.m. to Mazingarbe.
                            Relieved 7th R.S.F., taking over
                            trenches in Sector X1 from Sap
                            18 to 8C exclusive.

 Sept. 10--   do.           Casualties in Sap 18--5 killed
                            2 wounded.

 Sept. 12--Verquin          Relieved by 13th Royal Scots.
                            Marched to billets at Verquin.

 Sept. 18--   do.           Our pipers played our 4th Battalion
                            through Verquin.

 Sept. 19--   do.           Pipe Band played retreat in
                            Square at Bethune. First pipers
                            to do so; loudly cheered by crowd.

 Sept. 21--   do.           8 p.m. moved to Vermelles-Grenay
                            branch line of trenches. Bombardment
                            of enemy's trenches began that
                            morning.

 Sept. 25--Grenay           Moved off at 4.45 a.m. to the
          Vermeilles Line   attack. Marched to Quality Street;
                            entered trench southern up. Head
                            of Battalion turned down trench
                            21 and joined 9th Black Watch.
                            Gas turned on at 5.50 a.m. for
                            40 minutes. Assault delivered
                            at 6.30 a.m. by 9th Black Watch
                            with the Lens Road on right,
                            and the 8th Seaforths on the
                            left. The 7th Camerons followed
                            in support, the 10th Gordons
                            being in reserve. Lieut.-Col.
                            Sandilands, D.S.O. commanded
                            on Hill 70 from 10 a.m. to 11
                            p.m., when relieved by Lieut.-Col.
                            Maclean, Royal Scots. At 8 p.m.
                            G.O.C 46 Brigade arrived in
                            Loos. It was decided that 45
                            Brigade should hold Hill 70
                            and that what was left of the
                            Camerons should withdraw. At
                            11 p.m. Lieut.-Col. Sandilands
                            with 6 officers and 75 men marched
                            back through Loos to La Philosophe.
                            The losses for the day were:--4
                            officers killed; 6 officers
                            wounded; 4 officers missing;
                            64 men killed; 253 wounded; 217
                            missing; total, 14 officers,
                            534 men.

 Sept. 26--Loos Battle      Ordered to hold first line of old
                            British trench. Met large numbers
                            of men of the 21st Division
                            retiring from Loos. At 1 p.m.
                            ordered to hold support line
                            of old German trench. The 7th
                            Camerons dug themselves in on
                            reverse of parapet owing to gas
                            rendering the trench untenable.

 Sept. 27--Mazingarbe       Ordered to withdraw to Mazingarbe
                            at 1.30 a.m.

 Sept. 28--Houchin          At 9.30 a.m. marched to billets
                            at Houchin.

 Oct. 3--Lillers            Marched to Lillers. Billets.

 Oct. 12--Noeux les Mines   Left Lillers, entrained 5.30 p.m.
                            for Noeux les Mines.

 Oct. 26--Trenches Right    Left Noeux les Mines at 12.40
                  Sec.      p.m. for trenches. Took over
                            line from 6th Camerons.

 Oct. 29-- do. O.G. Line    Relieved by 8th Seaforths, going
                            back into old German trenches.

 Nov. 2-- do. Right Sec.    Relieved 8th Seaforths in front
                            line.

 Nov. 3--   do.   do.       11 men killed and 19 wounded
                            (B Coy). Trench infiladed by
                            heavy guns from Hulluch direction.
                            Trench considerably damaged.

 Nov. 4--  do. O.G. Line    1 man killed and 3 wounded. Relieved
                            by 8th Seaforths: occupied old
                            German trench.

 Nov. 5--   do.   do.       Found work parties (burying
                            dead).

 Nov. 7--Noeux les Mines    Relieved by 8th K.O.S.B.'s and
                            marched to Noeux les Mines billets.

 Nov. 13--Sector D.I.       Relieved 13th Royal Scots in
                            support B Coy. O.B. Support
                            line A and B Coys. billets Vermeilles,
                            D Coy. Philosophe.

 Nov. 16--   do.            Relieved 8th Seaforths in front
                            line, D Coy. left, A Coy. right,
                            C Coy. support, B Coy. reserve.

 Nov. 19--Noyelles          Relieved by 8th Seaforths, went
                            into reserve.

 Nov. 22--Trenches          Relieved 8th Seaforths in trenches.
                            C Coy. left, B Coy. right, A Coy.
                            support, D Coy. reserve.

 Nov. 24--Noeux les Mines   Relieved by 13th Royal Scots.
                            Marched to billets.

 Nov. 26--Sailly la Bourse  Marched to billets.

 Dec. 1--Sector C1          Relieved 1st A. and S. H. in
                            trenches in front line, Devon Lane
                            to Goeben Alley. A Coy. right,
                            B Coy. left, C Coy. support, D
                            Coy. reserve.

 Dec. 4--Noyelles           Brigade Reserve relieved by 8th
                            Seaforths.

 Dec. 7--Trenches           Relieved 8th Seaforths in trenches
                            O.G.1 and O.B.5. D Coy. right,
                            C Coy. left, B support, A Coy.
                            reserve.

 Dec. 11--Philosophe        Relieved by 8th Seaforths. B,
                            C and D Coy. billets in Philosophe.
                            A Coy. O.B.5.

 Dec. 14--Allouagne         141st Brigade relieved 44th,
                            Battalion relieved by 19th County
                            of London Battalion. Marched
                            to Noeux les Mines, entraining
                            for Lillers, thence marching
                            to Allouagne.


1916

 Jan. 5--Allouagne          Divisional exercise. Left Allouagne
                            at 8 a.m., via Burbure, Ecquedecque,
                            Lieres, Auchy, arriving Rely
                            at 3.45 p.m.

 Jan. 6--Rely               Battalion marching from 7.30
                            a.m., via Cumem Bomy to Coyecque,
                            returning Rely at 6 p.m.

 Jan. 7--Allouagne          Left Rely at 1 a.m., arriving at
                            Allouagne at 12.15 p.m., via
                            Billery, Hurionville and Burbure.

 Jan. 14--Trenches Loos     Left Allouagne 8.15 a.m. for Loos.
                            Marched to Lillers, entrained to
                            Noeux les Mines, marched to Loos
                            via Philosophe. Relieved 2nd
                            K.R.R. H.Q. in the Trait de
                            l'Union, A Coy. Gun Alley and
                            Reserve Trench, B and D Coys.
                            Gun Alley and C Coy. Lens Road
                            Redoubt, 65 Metre Point and
                            Northern Sap Redoubt.

 Jan. 15--Trenches Loos     At 6 p.m. A, B and D Coys., less
          Hill 70 to        2 platoons, took over firing line
          Section 14B.      between Boyau des Anglais and
                            Loos-Laurent Road. B Coy. relieved
                            8th Seaforths on left. D Coy.
                            (2 platoons) in centre and A
                            Coy. on right relieved the 15th
                            London Regiment. H.Q. in cellars
                            in Loos with 2 platoons of D
                            Coy. C Coy. moved from Redoubt
                            in 10th Avenue to Gun Alley.

 Jan. 16--   do.   do.      Two platoons of C Coy. relieved
                            two platoons of the 8th Seaforths.
                            A Coy. 6th Royal Irish attached
                            for instruction.

 Jan. 17--   do.   do.      B Coy. to Gun Alley; front line
                            held by two companies only; the
                            two platoons of D Coy. (in cellars)
                            now proceeding to firing line.

 Jan. 18--   do.   do.      C Coy. relieved A Coy.

 Jan. 20--   do.   do.      B Coy. relieved D Coy.

 Jan. 23--   do.   do.      Battalion relieved by 8th Seaforths
                            going into reserve 10th Avenue.
                            H.Q. Pont Street. Battalion
                            area from Vendin Alley to Chalk
                            Pit Alley. B Coy. on left, then
                            C, D less one platoon, A Coy.
                            less 2 platoons. One platoon
                            of D Coy. in Northern Sap Redoubt.
                            One platoon A 65 Metre Point
                            Redoubt and one Lens Road Redoubt.

 Jan. 26--Philosophe        Relieved by 4th Suffolks. Proceeded
                            to Philosophe.

 Jan. 27--Noeux les Mines   Left Philosophe at 9.15 a.m.
                            Billets taken over from 8th
                            K.O.S.B.

 Jan. 29--   do.   do.      Finding large working party of
                            659 men. Stood to from 5.30 to
                            9 p.m. Reserve M.G. moved to
                            Mazingarbe.

 Feb. 1--Hulluch Section    Marched from Noeux les Mines
                            at 2.30 p.m. and relieved 11th
                            A. and S. H. (of 45th Infantry
                            Brigade) in left sub section
                            Hulluch.

 Feb. 4--Philosophe         Relieved in evening by 10th
                            Gordons and moved into Brigade
                            reserve at Philosophe.

 Feb. 7--Hulluch Section    Relieved 10th Gordons in left
                            sub section. B and C Coys. front
                            line, A support, D reserve.

 Feb. 10--   do.   do.      Relieved by 10th Gordons and
                            relieved 9th Black Watch in 10th
                            Avenue as Bde. support.

 Feb. 13--Noeux les Mines   Relieved by 8th K.O.S.B.'s of
                            46th Brigade; marched to Noeux
                            les Mines.

 Feb. 16--   do.   do.      Finding working parties, 10 officers
                            500 men.

 Feb. 19--14 B. 15 Section  Relieved 6th Camerons in left sub
                            section of 14 B. 15 Section from
                            Vendin Alley to Possen Alley.
                            A and D Coys. firing line, C
                            support, B reserve.

 Feb. 25--   do.   do.      Relieved by 9th Black Watch,
                            moved into Brigade support 10th
                            Avenue, A Coy. in Gun trench.

 Feb. 26--14 B. 15 Section  One officer and 59 men proceeded
                            to form part of permanent working
                            party on right sub section.

 Feb. 28--   do.   do.      Relieved 8th Seaforths in right
                            sub section. A and B Coys.
                            firing line, C support, D reserve.

 Mar. 2--Mazingarbe         Relieved by 12th H.L.I., marched
                            to billets at Mazingarbe. Found
                            working party of 150 men.

 Mar. 8--Hulluch Section    Relieved 7th R.S.F. in left sub
                            section of Hulluch Section, leaving
                            Mazingarbe at 8.30 a.m. C and
                            D Coys. firing line, B Coy. support,
                            A Coy. reserve.

 Mar. 11--   do.   do.      A Coy. changed with D.

 Mar. 12--   do.   do.      C Coys. line blown in, in 11 places.

 Mar. 13--   do.   do.      Support line blown in, in 4 places.

 Mar. 14--Philosophe        Relieved by 3 Coys. 10th Gordons
                            and 1 Coy. Inniskilling Fusiliers.
                            Proceeded into Brigade reserve.
                            In billets. Day working parties of
                            205 men supplied.

 Mar. 17--Hulluch Section   Battalion (less D Coy.) relieved
                            8th Inniskilling Fusiliers, going
                            into Brigade support in 10th
                            Avenue. D Coy. in reserve line
                            centre sub-section under O.C.
                            commanding 8th Seaforths. All
                            available men on working parties,
                            salving.

 Mar. 20--Noeux les Mines   Relieved by 12th H.L.I. Marched
                            to Noeux les Mines.

 Mar. 22--   do.   do.      Night working parties of 6 officers
                            and 300 men supplied.

 Mar. 23--   do.   do.      B Coy. proceeded to La Buissiere
                            to do duty at 1st Corps H.Q.

 Mar. 25--Allouagne         Railed to Lillers and marched to
                            Allouagne. Transport moved by
                            road.

 Mar. 28--   do.            Ceremonial parade at Lillers at
                            3 p.m. G.O.C. 1st Army distributed
                            medals. Brigade marched past
                            in column of route.

 April 1--Allouagne         Innoculation.

 April 7--Fervin Palfart    Divisional exercise. Battalion
                            left 7 a.m., billeted 2 p.m.
                            Marched via Lozinghem, Auchel,
                            Cauchy-a-la-Tour, Perfay Bellory,
                            Auchy-au-Bois to Fervin Palfart.

 April 8--   do.   do.      Marched to Enquin les Mines via
                            Flechin and Cuhen, entraining to
                            Fervin.

 April 9--Allouagne         Marched back to billets.

 April 10--   do.           Smoke demonstration at Burbure.

 April 10--   do.           Lieut.-Col. J. W. Sandilands,
                            C.M.G., D.S.O., relinquished command
                            of Battalion on appointment
                            to 104th Brigade.

 April 21--   do.           G.O.C. (15th Division) inspected
                            Companies.

 April 25--Annequin         12 noon A, C and D Coys. left
                            Allouagne, marched to Lillers,
                            entraining for Noeux les Mines.
                            Marched from Noeux les Mines to
                            reserve billets at Annequin. B
                            Coy. rejoined Battalion.

 April 26--Trench, Left     Relieved 7th Royal Sussex Regiment
           Sub-Section      in Quarry Sector, front from
           Quarry Sector    Southern junction Swinbourne
                            Loup and Brookwood Trench to
                            Rifleman's Alley. A Coy. left,
                            D Coy. centre, B Coy. right
                            finding their own supports, C Coy.
                            reserve O.G.1. H.Q. in O.G.1 at
                            Pt. G11.d.3.9.

 April 27--   do.   do.     Shelling and Chlorine Gas. R.E.
                            exploded mine right leg of Hairpin;
                            bombers co-operated; casualties,
                            killed 6, wounded and shell shock
                            18.

 April 28--   do   do.      Shelling and bombardment by
                            enemy.

 April 30--Noyelles and     Relieved by 10th Gordons. Battalion
           Vermelles        in Brigade Reserve. A and C
                            Coys. billets Vermeilles. H.Q.
                            and B and D Coys. in billets
                            Noyelles.

 May 4--Left Sub-Section    Relieved 10th Gordons in Left
        Quarry Section      Sub-Section Quarry Section. Disposition:
                            A. Coy. left, C Coy. centre,
                            B Coy. right finding their own
                            supports, D Coy. reserve in
                            O.G.1. Battalion H.Q. in O.G.1
                            at Pt. G.11.d.3.9. front southern
                            junction of Swinbourne Loup and
                            Brookwood Trench to Rifleman's
                            Alley. At 5 p.m. enemy shelled
                            O.G.1. At 7 p.m. R.E.'s exploded
                            3 mines at the Hairpin, our
                            bombers advanced and occupied
                            the lip of the crater. Enemy
                            bombarded front lines until
                            midnight. Casualties, 4 O.R.
                            killed, 28 wounded.

 May 5--   do.   do.        Bombardment during afternoon.
                            1 O.R. killed, 3 wounded.

 May 6--   do.   do.        Bombardment continued.

 May 8--   do.   do.        From 5 to 5.45 a.m. Trench mortar
                            batteries bombarded far lip
                            of left Hairpin crater, but
                            were unsuccessful in destroying
                            it. At 10.30 a.m. relieved by the
                            10th Gordons and moved into
                            Brigade support. Disposition:
                            C Coy. O.B.1, left of Fosse Way,
                            B Coy., O.B.1, right of Fosse
                            Way, D Coy. O.B.4 and O.B.5.,
                            A Coy. Curley Crescent. H.Q.
                            junction of Fosse Way and Curley
                            Crescent. Found working parties
                            for 180th Tunnelling Coy. R.E.,
                            253rd Tunnelling Coy. R.E., and
                            73rd Field Coy. R.E.

 May 9/10--  do.   do.      Found above working parties for
                            Tunnelling Coys. R.E.

 May 11--Labourse           Relieved by the 7th Battalion
                            K.O.S.B.'s proceeding to billets
                            Labourse, arriving at 1.45 p.m.
                            Received orders to stand to
                            (4.30 p.m.).

 May 12--   do.             Battalion standing to until 2.45
                            p.m., when order to stand down
                            was received.

 May 13--   do.             Working party of 4 officers and
                            200 O.R. proceeded to trenches.
                            Major C. H. Marsh, D.S.O., assumed
                            command of the Battalion.

 May 14--   do.             Two Coys. ordered to proceed at
                            once to the trenches under orders.
                            46th Brigade. The other two Coys.
                            and H.Q. to proceed to Noyelles
                            under order 46th Brigade, C and
                            D occupying Lancashire trench.
                            H.Q. and A and B Coys. billets
                            at Noyelles. At 6 p.m. orders
                            from 46th Brigade that A Coy.
                            occupy part of Villiage line. B
                            Coy. occupy billets in Vermeilles,
                            H.Q. in Lancashire trench. Orders
                            executed by 7.30 p.m.

 May 15--Noyelles           9 a.m. orders from 46th Brigade
                            for A and B Coys. and H.Q. to
                            return to billets in Noyelles.

 May 17--   do.             A and B Coys. relieved C and D
                            Coys. Lancashire trench.

 May 19--Left Sub-Section   Battalion relieved 11th A. and
         Hohenzollern       S. H. Disposition: C Coy. right,
         Section            D centre, A Coy. left finding their
                            own supports, with B Coy. in
                            reserve. Front from Boyau 109
                            (exclusive) to Mud Alley G.4.a.8.8.
                            (inclusive). Four men wounded.

 May 20--   do.   do.       Our saphead at G.4.a. 8½. 8½.
                            blown in by enemy. Seven O.R.
                            wounded.

 May 21--   do.   do.       12.45 p.m. enemy sprung mine
                            between craters 3 and 4, filling
                            up our saps and connecting trench.
                            The damage was repaired. A severe
                            bombing fight took place. Casualties:
                            one officer killed.  O.R., 5
                            killed 19 wounded. Enemy driven
                            back.

 May 22--   do.   do.       Our engineers sprang mine in
                            centre sub-section in front of
                            junction of Poker Street and the
                            fire trench.

 May 23--   do.   do.       At 7.30 a.m. enemy completely
                            surprised us by springing another
                            mine at point G.4.d. 6½. 5½. Saps 9.
                            9A Argyle Sap Hogsback and part
                            of Northampton trench filled with
                            debris; relief postponed until we
                            cleared trenches, etc. Relieved
                            by 8th Seaforths, moving into
                            Brigade support. Disposition:
                            A Coy.--1 platoon in Junction
                            Keep, 3 platoons in Lancashire
                            Trench; B Coy.--1 platoon in
                            Central Keep, 3 platoons in Railway
                            Reserve Trench. C and D Coys.
                            in Lancashire Trench. H.Q. at
                            point G. 3.c. 8.2. Casualties:
                            O.R. 3 killed, 46 wounded.

 May 24/26--  do.  do.      Every available man employed in
                            working parties.

 May 27--Right Sub-Section  Battalion relieved 9th Black
         Hohenzollern       Watch. Disposition: B Coy. right,
         Section            A Coy. centre, D Coy. left finding
                            their own supports, C Coy. reserve.
                            Front extended from the junction
                            of Sackville Street and Hulluch
                            Alley on left to junction of
                            Quarry Bay and Brookwood Trench
                            on right. 9 p.m. our artillery
                            dispersed enemy working party
                            opposite Rabbit's Hole.

 May 28--   do.   do.       Two intelligence reports stated
                            enemy intended to attack and to
                            use gas. Killed O.R. 1, wounded
                            4.

 May 29--   do.   do.       Similar reports received from air
                            reconnaissance. Abnormal transport
                            movement near Haines and 5000
                            enemy seen moving in the open.
                            Artillery activity by our left
                            and right groups. O.R. wounded
                            3.

 May 30--   do.   do.       Enemy trench knocked in by our
                            artillery. Enemy shelled Hulluch
                            Alley and rifle grenaded Rabbit's
                            Hole. Heavy trench mortar bomb
                            fell on our mine shaft heads
                            in front line, inflicting several
                            casualties. Enemy showed two
                            yellow flags with red St. Andrews
                            Crosses over parapet at the
                            Kink.

 May 31--   do.   do.       Heavy shelling by both sides.
                            O.R., 1 killed, 9 wounded.

 June 4--Bethune            Relieved by 7/8th K.O.S.B.'s.
                            A Coy. proceeded to Gosnay. The
                            remainder of the Battalion were
                            billeted at Bethune in the Tobacco
                            Factory. O.R. 1 wounded.

 June 10--   do.            In billets. A Coy. rejoined Battalion.

 June 12--Brigade Support   Relieved 6/7th R.S.F. in Brigade
                            support, Hulluch Sector. Disposition:
                            A Coy. Curley Crescent, B Coy.
                            2 platoons O.B.1, 2 platoons
                            O.B.5., C Coy. Tenth Avenue
                            between Hay Alley and Hulluch
                            Road. D Coy., 2 platoons
                            Lone Tree Redoubt. H.Q. at Junction
                            of Curley Crescent and Fosse
                            Way. Four platoons K.O.R. Lancaster
                            Regiment attached for instruction.
                            O.R. 2 wounded.

 June 16--Right Sub-Section Relieved 8th Seaforths. Disposition:
          Hulluch Section   C Coy., left, two platoons. B
                            centre, D Coy. right finding
                            their own supports. A Coy. and
                            2 platoons of B in reserve trench
                            between Wings Way and Vendin
                            Alley. O.R. 2 killed, 20 wounded.

 June 22--   do.   do.      Disposition changed to: B Coy.
                            left, 2 platoons of East Surrey
                            Regiment in centre, A Coy. on
                            the right finding their own support.
                            Half Coy. 13th East Surrey Regiment
                            and C and D Coys. in reserve
                            trench. Surreys in for instruction.
                            O.R. 2 killed, 19 wounded.

 June 26--   do.   do.      Coy. of East Surrey Regiment
                            left trenches.

 June 28--Bethune           After discharge of gas four patrols
                            of 39 men attempted to raid
                            enemy's trenches. 3 patrols held
                            up owing to uncut wire. Fourth
                            patrol bombed the German front
                            line and returned, leaving one
                            man killed. Battalion was relieved
                            by 10th/11th Scottish Rifles.
                            In billets. A and C Coys. Orphanage,
                            Bethune, B and D Coys. in Verquinal.
                            H.Q. Bethune. Casualties: killed 9,
                            wounded 19.

 July 6--Left Sub-Section   Relieved 6/7th R.S.F. Disposition:
         Hohenzollern       D Coy. left, C Coy. centre, A Coy.
         Section            right finding their own supports,
                            B Coy. reserve.

 July 7--   do.   do.       Enemy shelled junction of Mud
                            Alley and Sticky Trench, and
                            Northampton Trench, doing considerable
                            damage. O.R. 3 wounded.

 July 8--   do.   do.       Mud Alley and Quarry shelled
                            with H.E. Four enemy seen in
                            crater wearing khaki caps our
                            pattern. O.R. 3 wounded.

 July 9--   do.   do.       More shelling on both sides.
                            Enemy exploded mine. O.R. 4
                            wounded.

 July 10--   do.   do.      Relieved by 8th Seaforths. Battalion
                            in support. O.R. 4 wounded.

 July 12/13--   do.         Found working parties. Officer
                            1, O.R. 2 wounded.

 July 14--Right Sub-Section Relieved 9th Black Watch. Disposition:
                            B Coy. left, D Coy. centre, C Coy.
                            right finding their own supports,
                            A Coy. reserve. O.R. 1 wounded.

 July 15--   do.   do.      At 7.40 a.m. enemy exploded
                            small mine near Sap 98 A. No
                            damage done. O.R. 2 wounded.

 July 16--   do.   do.      From 1.30 p.m. to 4.30 p.m. our
                            artillery bombarded enemy's wire
                            and trenches. From 9 to 9.30
                            enemy retaliated on Crown and
                            Border trenches, doing considerable
                            damage. Casualties: 4 killed,
                            11 wounded. At 4 a.m. enemy
                            exploded mine near the right
                            crater of the Hairpin. R.E.'s
                            exploded 2 mines in the same
                            vicinity. These explosions filled
                            in our trenches.

 July 17--Right Sub-Section At 9 p.m. enemy started heavy
          Hohenzollern      bombardment on our front, and
          Section           under cover of this raided our
                            trenches in the vicinity of Alexander
                            Sap, capturing one officer and
                            12 O.R. Casualties: killed 3,
                            wounded 5.

 July 18--   do.   do.      At 6 p.m. R.E.'s exploded 2
                            mines at junction of Rifleman's
                            Alley and Alexander Trench, destroying
                            Border Redoubt and Alexander
                            Sap. Two craters were formed,
                            the left the larger. Our bombers
                            occupied the far lip of the
                            left crater, and tried to hold
                            the right crater, which was found
                            to be untenable owing to rifle
                            grenades and aerial darts. A
                            bombing post was constructed,
                            and the work of consolidating
                            craters carried out. Casualties:
                            One officer and 6 men killed;
                            4 officers and 32 men wounded;
                            1 crushed; 1 shell shock.

 July 19--   do.   do.      The enemy sprang a mine in existing
                            craters at Hairpin; 2 killed,
                            4 wounded.

 July 20--   do.   do.      Intermittent shelling by enemy;
                            5 wounded.

 July 22--Houchin           Relieved by 2nd Royal Berkshire
                            Regiment and proceeded to billets
                            at Houchin. O.R. 1 wounded.

 July 23--Dieval            Left Houchin and proceeded via
                            Bruay to billets at Dieval.

 July 26--Gouy-en-Ternois   Left Dieval and marched via La
                            Trieuloye and Averdoingt to
                            billets Gouy-en-Ternois.

 July 27--Occoches          Marched from Gouy-en-Ternois
                            via Honval, Rebreuve and Canteleux
                            to billets at Occoches.

 July 28--Autheux           Marched from Occoches to billets
                            at Autheux.

 July 30--   do.            Draft of 25 O.R. arrived from base.

 July 31--Naours            Marched from Autheux via Fienvilliers
                            and Candas to billets at Naours.

 Aug. 4--Mirvaux            Marched at 4.45 a.m. via Talmas
                            and Septenville to Mirvaux.

 Aug. 5--La Houssoye        Marched to La Houssoye via Behencourt.
                            Billets and bivouac.
                            Bathing in river L'Hallue.

 Aug. 8--Albert E.7.b.      Instructions issued 4th platoon
                            in each Coy. to be pioneer platoon,
                            1 2 and 4 platoons to be full
                            strength of fighting unit of
                            10's. 3 platoons to be weak
                            platoons.

 Aug. 11--   do.            Found working parties of 400 O.R.

 Aug. 12--E.5.b.7.6.        Replaced 9th Black Watch in
                            bivouac at E.5.b.7.6. Bde. in
                            Division reserve.

 Aug. 14--X.22.a (Peakwood) Brigade in "C" area.

 Aug. 15--   do.            Found working parties making
                            Highland trench.

 Aug. 16--"B" area          Relieved the 9th Black Watch
          (the Cutting)     "B" area Brigade support. Disposition:
                            H.Q. The Cutting, C (less 1
                            platoon) and D Coy., Gourlay
                            Trench; 1 platoon C Coy. and
                            1 Lewis gun, Villa Keep; A Coy.
                            Contalmaison; B Coy. Cutting
                            Contalmaison X17.A. Received
                            orders from Brigade to attack
                            next morning.

 Aug. 17--"A" area          Attacked Switch Elbow. Relieved
          (Front Line)      by 8th Seaforths during the
                            night and early morning. Casualties:
                            killed 4 officers, died of wounds
                            1, wounded 9; O.R., 40 killed,
                            4 died of wounds, 9 missing
                            believed killed, missing 7, missing
                            believed wounded 7, wounded 160.

 Aug. 18--"C" area          In Brigade reserve--reorganising.

 Aug. 19--"C" area          Found working parties. O.R. killed
                            2, wounded 3.

 Aug. 20--"B" area          Replaced 8/10th Gordons in Brigade
                            support. Heavy gas shelling
                            by enemy.

 Aug. 21--"B" area          Found working parties. Casualties
                            6 wounded.

 Aug. 22--"A" area          Relieved 8/10th Gordons front
                            line. Disposition: A Coy.--2
                            platoons Gourlay trench, 2 platoons
                            Lancashire trench; B Coy. Gourlay
                            trench; C Coy.--Cameron trench,
                            between Gordon Alley and Gloucester
                            Alley with supports in Highland
                            trench; D Coy.--Cameron trench
                            between Gordon Alley and Munster
                            Alley, with supports in Butterworth
                            trench. H.Q. in Gourlay trench.
                            Commenced construction of 6
                            strong points in front of front
                            line during the night. Casualties:--killed
                            4, died of wounds 1, wounded 7.

 Aug. 23--   do.            5 of strong points completed and
                            occupied. O.R. 3 killed, 3
                            wounded.

 Aug. 24--Scotts Redoubt    In Brigade reserve. Relieved by
                            9th Black Watch replacing 8/10th
                            Gordons in Scotts Redoubt. Found
                            working parties.

 Aug. 26--"C" area          Replaced 8/10th Gordons in "C"
                            Battalion area 4.30 a.m.; in new
                            position by 6.30 a.m. C and D
                            Coys.; A and B Coys. 7 a.m. Disposition:
                            C and D Coys. Contalmaison; A and
                            B Coys. X22.b. Found working parties.

 Aug. 28--"B" area          In Brigade support. Replaced
                            8/10th Gordons A Coy. and B
                            (less one platoon) Gourlay trench
                            (one platoon B Coy. keep Contalmaison),
                            C Coy. Contalmaison and D Coy.
                            Cutting. Wiring party Highland
                            trench. O.R. 1 killed, 1 wounded.

 Aug. 29--"B" area          Party completes wiring Highland
                            trench. O.R. 1 wounded.

 Aug. 30--Bivouac O.B.1     Brigade moved into Divisional
          Trench            Reserve. Relieved by 24th Northumberland
                            Fusiliers and occupied bivouac
                            at O.B.1 trench X.26.d. O.R.
                            2 wounded.

 Sept. 5--Front Line Right  Battalion relieved 12th H.L.I. and
          Brigade Area      10th Scottish Rifles in front line.
                            Right Brigade. Support. B Coy.
                            left front Swansea trench, D
                            Coy. 1 platoon Intermediate
                            trench, 1 platoon Quarry, 2
                            platoons Mill Street; A Coy.
                            Right front Bethel Sap, Clarkes
                            trench and strong point; C Coy.
                            support Argyle Alley Chester
                            Street. H.Q. in the Quarry.

 Sept. 6--   do.            Killed 2, wounded 4.

 Sept. 7--O.G.1 between     Battalion moved into position
          S.7.c.2.1 and     O.G.1 from S.7.c.2.1. to S.14.a.3.6.
          S.14.a.5.6        (behind Bazentin-le-Petit-Wood),
                            being relieved by 8th Seaforths.
                            Disposition: from left to right
                            D, B, C, (less 1 platoon) and A Coys.
                            1 platoon C Coy. and 4 Lewis guns
                            relieved the garrison of the keep
                            held by D Coy. 8th Seaforths at
                            about Point S.7.b.4.8. Casualties--killed
                            1, wounded 10.

 Sept. 10--"B" area         Relieved by "B" Battalion 149th
                            Infantry Brigade and "B" Battalion
                            159th Infantry Brigade, and
                            moved into "B" area. A and C
                            Coys., Cutting, B and D Pearl
                            Alley, H.Q. Peakewood. Casualties--wounded
                            6.

 Sept. 11--Front Line       Relieved the 8/10th Gordons in
           Sanderson        the front line. Disposition: A
           Trench           Coy., 2 platoons Sanderson trench,
                            2 platoons Egg trench and 6th
                            Avenue, C Coy., 2 platoons front
                            line to Pioneer trench, 2 platoons
                            near Villa wood, B Coy. Koyli
                            trench. Casualties: Officers 1
                            wounded; O.R. killed 3, wounded
                            14.

 Sept. 13--Bivouac E.7      Relieved by 6/7th R.S.F. and
           Central          proceeded via Contalmaison, Scotts
                            Redoubt, Becourt Wood, Albert,
                            Albert-Amiens Road to bivouacs
                            at E.7 Central.

 Sept. 14--Shelter Birch    Battalion moved into Brigade
           and              reserve at Shelter-Wood, Birch-Wood,
           Round-Woods.     Round-Wood.

 Sept. 18--Koyli Trench     Brigade support. Disposition:
                            D Coy. Ham trench, A Coy. Egg
                            trench, C Coy. Post trench and
                            part of Sanderson trench, B Coy.
                            Tangle trench. H.Q. junction of
                            Koyli trench and Welch trench.

 Sept. 19--Bivouac E.5.b.   Battalion relieved by 8th Yorks
           and Lavieville   23rd Division on night of 18th,
                            and morning of 19th rested in
                            Bivouac (E.5.b.), afterwards proceeding
                            to camp at Lavieville.

 Sept. 20--Franvillers      In billets.

 Sept. 22--   do.           In billets.

 Oct. 6--Becourt-Wood       Brigade sports cancelled and
                            Brigade moved up to Becourt-Wood
                            and bivouaced; men's lines in
                            cemetery and officers on other
                            side of road.

 Oct. 8--Crescent Alley     Battalion line. A Coy. O.G.1
                            B Coy. Starfish trench, C, D Coys.
                            (less one platoon) Prue trench,
                            H.Q. one platoon D Coy. Crescent
                            Alley. Casualties:--Officers, 1
                            wounded; O.R.'s, killed 2, wounded 27.

 Oct. 11--Front Line        Relieved 9/10th Gordons night of
                            10/11th in front line. Disposition
                            D Coy. on left of Le Sars-Bapaume
                            Road, B Coy. on right of Le
                            Sars-Bapaume Road. C Coy. Cutting
                            in M.16.c. A Coy. 2 platoons Tangle
                            M.22.a. 2 platoons in O.G.2. H.Q.
                            at M.22.a.2.1. Casualties:--Officers,
                            wounded 2; O.R.'s, killed 5,
                            wounded 22, shell shock 5.

 Oct. 13--Crescent Alley    Relieved by 8th Seaforths. A
                            Coy. Crescent Alley, B and D
                            Coys. Prue trench Coy., O.G.1 H.Q.
                            Crescent Alley. Casualties:--Officers,
                            wounded 1, O.R., killed
                            10, wounded 17, shell shock 6.

 Oct. 14--Contalmaison      Relieved by 12th H.L.I. proceeding
          Cutting           into reserve area.

 Oct. 19--Right Section     "C" area, relieved the 9th Black
          Front Area        Watch. Starfish trench. A, C,
                            B Coys. 2 platoons, D Coy. Tangle
                            trench, 2 platoons D, Tyne trench
                            H.Q. M33.D.4.4.

 Oct. 21--"A" area Front    Relieved 8/10th Gordons front
           Line             line. Disposition: A, C Coys.
                            front line, B Coy. Sunken Road,
                            Tangle, D Coy. O.G.2. Battalion
                            carried in two day's rations.

 Oct. 23--"B" area          Relieved by the 9th Black Watch
                            moved into "B" area in support,
                            A, C Coys. Prue trench, B Coy.
                            Crescent Alley, D Coy. O.G.1,
                            H.Q. Crescent Alley.

 Oct. 24--Contalmaison      In reserve. Battalion relieved by
          Cutting           12th H.L.I. Casualties: killed
                            3, wounded 5, shell shock 8.

 Oct. 27--"C" Area          Battalion relieved 10th Scottish
          Starfish          Rifles. A and C Coy. Starfish,
          Line              D Coy. Tyne, Tangle, H.Q. Martin
                            Alley. Casualties: 4 wounded.

 Oct. 30--Front Line        Battalion relieved 10th Scottish
                            Rifles in "A" area. B and D
                            front line, A Coy. Sunken Road,
                            C Coy. O.G.1, H.Q. 26th Avenue.

 Oct. 31--"D" Area,         Relieved by 8/10th Gordons. B
           Reserve          and D Coys. Swansea trench, A
                            Coy. O.G.1, C Coy. Gourlay trench,
                            H.Q. Bazentin-le-Petit. Casualties:
                            killed 4, wounded 8, shell
                            shock 3.

 Nov. 2--Becourt Hill       Battalion was relieved and moved
                            into Camp.

 Nov. 5--Bresle             In Camp.

 Nov. 10--   do.            Inspected by G.O.C.-in-C., who
                            expressed himself as greatly pleased
                            with appearance of Battalion, and
                            thanks them for work done.

 Nov. 20--   do.            Brigade was inspected by Lieut.-General
                            Sir W. P. Putteney, K.C.B., D.S.O.,
                            Commanding 3rd Corps.

 Nov. 21--   do.            Brigade Sports.

 Nov. 26--   do.            In Camp. Inspection by G.O.C.
                            15th Division.

 Dec. 1--Albert             Proceeded via Lavieville and
                            Millencourt to billets. Whole
                            Battalion on working parties.

 Dec. 7--Camp X23.          To camp via La Boiselle and
         Central            Contalmaison. Found working
                            parties. Relieved 6/7th R.S.F.
                            about X23. Central.

 Dec. 16--Shelter-Wood      In camp. Transport at C Hapes
          Scotts Redoubt    Spur. Relieved 8th Worcester's
          North             at Shelter-Wood Scots Redoubt
                            North.

 Dec. 17--   do.            Found working parties.

 Dec. 19--Acid Drop South   Battalion relieved 6th Camerons.

 Dec. 21--Front Line 26th   Relieved 8/10th Gordons, Right
          Avenue            Sub-Section C Coy. Scotland
                            trench, Warlincourt and Gilbert
                            Alleys, A Coy. O.G.1. B Coy. and
                            H.Q. 26th Avenue, D Coy. Martinpuich.
                            Officers missing 1, wounded 1,
                            O.R. wounded 4.

 Dec. 23--   do.            C relieved D, D relieved B, B
                            relieved A, A relieved C.

 Dec. 25--Acid Drop Camp    Relieved by 8th Seaforths and
          South             proceeded by platoons to Acid
                            Drop camp south, 100 yds. interval.

 Dec. 26--Shelter Wood      Relieved by 10th Scottish Rifles.
          South             Finding working parties.

 Dec. 31--Front Right       Relieved 6/7th R.S.F. B Coy.
          Sector            right front, C Coy. left front, A
                            Coy. support Sunken Road, D
                            Coy. reserve Flers line. Q.M.
                            Stores Pioneer Camp.


1917.

 Jan. 2--   do.             A and D Coys. relieved C and B
                            Coys. respectively.

 Jan. 4--Support Area       Relieved by 4th Seaforths. A Coy.
                            moved to Prue trench, C Coy. to
                            Starfish, D Coy. to Seven Elms,
                            B Coy. to Starfish, H.Q. Seven
                            Elms.

 Jan. 5--   do.             Dug new communication trench
                            near Spur trench.

 Jan. 7--Pioneer Camp       Relieved by 8/10th Gordons.

 Jan. 8--Scots Redoubt      Relieved 10th Scottish Rifles less
         North              B Coy. forming Brigade working
                            party at R.36.c.

 Jan. 12--Villa Camp Copse  Moved to Villa Camp.

 Jan. 14--Acid Drop         In reserve, relieved by 8/10th
                            Gordons.

 Jan. 16--Front Line        Relieved 9th Black Watch: Right
                            Section left Sector A Coy. on
                            right, C on left, B in support,
                            3 platoons in O.G.1., one platoon
                            Destremont Farm, D Coy. in reserve
                            26th avenue.

 Jan. 18--   do.            B and D Coys. relieved C and A
                            Coys. respectively.

 Jan. 20--Scots Redoubt     Relieved by 12th H.L.I. Killed
          North             1, O.R. wounded 1 officer, 4 O.R.

 Jan. 24--Front Right       Relieved 6/7th R.S.F. in left
          Sector            sub-sector, C Coy. left, A Coy.
                            right, B support, Sunken Road,
                            D Coy. Flers line.

 Jan. 26--   do.            D and B Coys. relieved A and C
                            Coys. respectively.

 Jan. 28--Support Line      Relieved by 8th Seaforths, A Coy.
                            Prue trench, C Martinpuich, B
                            Starfish, B Coy. and H.Q. Seven
                            Elms.

 Jan. 30--Pioneer Camp      Relieved by 9th Black Watch.

 Feb. 1--Becourt Camp       Relieved by 18th Australian Battalion.
                            The 5th Australian Brigade.

 Feb. 4--Contay             In billets training.

 Feb. 14--Beauval           Moved to Beauval route Herressart,
                            Le val de Maison Vert,
                            Grand Fare.

 Feb. 15--Gazaincourt       Moved here at 11 a.m.

 Feb. 16--Bouque-maison     Moved here at 8 a.m.

 Feb. 17--Croisette         Moved here less two Coys. to
                            Framecourt at 7.45 a.m.

 Feb. 18--Moncheaux         Moved here at 9.15 a.m. via
                            Framecourt, Houvin Station, Buneville.

 Feb. 22--   do.            Working party of 16 officers, 544
                            other ranks sent to Milly.

 Feb. 24--Maisieres         Moved here less working party.

 Mar. 2--   do.             Working party rejoined Battalion.

 Mar. 6--   do.             The 44th Brigade inspected by
                            Commander-in-Chief at Ambrine.

 Mar. 11--Arras             The 44th Brigade relieved the
                            45th Brigade. Battalion in reserve.
                            1.3. Sector. Route:--Penin, Tilloy,
                            Hermaville, St. Pol-Arras Road.
                            A Coy. relieved 8/10th Gordons
                            as permanent Garrison of the
                            Cemetery Defences. Men in Arras
                            only allowed out between 5.45 p.m.
                            and 9.30 p.m. Transport and Q.M.
                            Stores at Duisans.

 Mar. 15--Front Line        Battalion relieved 8/10th Gordons
                            in right sub-sector of 1.3. sector.
                            Disposition: D Coy. Front Line,
                            C Coy. 2 Platoons support trench,
                            1 platoon reserve trench, 1 platoon
                            in billets near H.Q., B Coy. billets
                            78.79. Grand Place. Casualties:
                            Killed, 9 O.R., wounded 16 O.R.,
                            died of wounds 50 O.R.

 Mar. 16--   do.            Cleaning trenches. B Coy. relieved
                            D Coy. in front line.

 Mar. 18--Arras, Front      (1). D Coy. raided the enemy's
          Line              trenches between points G.21.d.
                            5½.4.-2½.3.-0½.5.-3.5½. Zero hour
                            2.50 a.m. (2). The 9th and 12th
                            Division co-operated at zero hour
                            by similar raids on their divisional
                            fronts. Casualties were: 18 O.R.
                            wounded.

 Mar. 19--   do.            Battalion relieved in right sub-sector
                            1.3. section by the 12th H.L.I.

 Mar. 20--Harbarcq          Moved to Harbarcq at 7.15 p.m.
                            Reserve. Casualties: Killed, 1
                            O.R., missing believed killed 1 O.R.,
                            wounded 1 officer, 35 O.R., died
                            of wounds 2 O.R.

 Mar. 26--Arras             In support. Relieved 9th Black
                            Watch and were attached to the
                            46th Brigade Infantry.

          do.               Found working parties. Casualties:
                            4 O.R. wounded. Transport at
                            Duisans.

 Mar. 31--Front Line        Front Line. The 44th Brigade
                            relieved on the right sub-sector
                            of the 1.3 sector. Battalion relieved
                            the 12th H.L.I. A Coy. front
                            line. D Coy. 3 platoons support
                            line, 1 platoon reserve line.
                            C Coy. in cemetery defences.
                            B Coy. in Billets.

 April 3--Arras, Grand      Reserve. Relieved by the 8/10th
          Place             Gordons and moved into billets
                            in cellar Grand Place. 2 O.R.
                            wounded.

 April 8--Arras Battle      In support. At 11.30 p.m. Battalion
                            moved out of cellars in the
                            Grand-Place, via the sewer and
                            communication trenches to assembly
                            trench in front of the Cemetery.
                            H.Q. in cellars in Rue-de-Douai.

 April 9--   do.            Battalion reported in support
                            position ready for attack. At
                            5.30 a.m. (zero hour) under intense
                            barrage assaulting battalions
                            (8/10th Gordons on right and
                            9th Black Watch on left), supported
                            by 7th Camerons, attacked the
                            first system of enemy trenches.
                            The Black Line gained. Battalion
                            occupied O.G.1. and O.G.2.

                            At 7.50 a.m. attack on the second
                            objective began. The 9th Black
                            Watch on the left held up by
                            the Railway Triangle, so also
                            were the 8/10th Gordons. With
                            the assistance of a tank the 9th
                            Black Watch captured the Rail-Triangle
                            (Blue Line).

                            At 3 p.m. received orders to
                            relieve the 9th Black Watch on
                            the left. Reorganised in Hermes
                            trench.

 April 10--Front Line       B and D Coys. moved forward,
                            2 platoons into Hecq trench and
                            2 platoons into Helle trench.
                            A and B Coys. moved to Cable
                            trench.

                            At 1 p.m. Battalion ordered to
                            proceed to the east side of Feuchy
                            to support the 45th Infantry
                            Brigade. Move completed by 4
                            p.m. Relieved by 6th Camerons,
                            Battalion proceeding to trenches
                            previously occupied.

 April 11--   do.           At 3 a.m. received orders to
                            occupy part of the Brown Line.
                            A Coy. right front. C Coy. left
                            front. B Coy. right support.
                            D left support. Move completed
                            by 4 a.m. Received orders to
                            take objective line running
                            through I 22.23.24. At 11 a.m.
                            coys. moved from their position
                            in artillery formation to the
                            attack, moving half right for
                            Orange Hill. Battalion then
                            occupied a system of trenches
                            about H.29 Central. Orders received
                            that at 2.50 p.m. a barrage
                            was commencing in Loue-Copse,
                            and that at 3 p.m. the Brigade
                            was to attack. Despite heavy
                            fire Battalion succeeded in
                            reaching a position running
                            between Lone Copse and Monchy.

                            At 7.30 p.m. orders received
                            from Brigade that Battalion was
                            to be relieved by a Battalion of
                            the 50th Brigade. The greater
                            portion of the Brigade reached
                            Monchy. The men of the Battalion
                            in and around Monchy ordered
                            to place themselves under the
                            the command of the C.O. Essex
                            Yeomanry, then in charge of the
                            defences of Monchy.

 April 12--    do.          At 3.30 a.m. O.C.'s Coys. ordered
                            to link up with the 8/10th Gordons
                            and to form a line about 100 yards
                            in front of the Sunken Road. This
                            movement completed relieved by a
                            company of the Worcester Regiment.
                            Battalion moved back to Helle
                            trench, arriving there about
                            5.30 a.m., where it remained till
                            3 p.m., when it moved back into
                            billets at Arras. 23 officers and
                            521 men proceeded to attack, 11
                            officers and 346 men returned.
                            Therefore the total casualties
                            were 12 officers and 175 men.

 April 14--Arras            In reserve. 4 O.R. killed, 2
                            officers and 21 O.R. wounded,
                            1 O.R. missing. Died of wounds
                            1 O.R. Casualties during the
                            operations during 9/12th April,
                            killed 5 officers, 19 O.R. Wounded,
                            7 officers and 128 O.R. Missing
                            24 O.R.

 April 22--Front Line       Battalion relieved 8/10th Gordons,
                            taking over the Left Sub-Section,
                            leaving the Grand Place billets
                            at 6.30 p.m. Route via St. Saveur,
                            Tilloy, N.15.d.7.9. N.16. C.1.8.
                            N.10.d.5.1 and thence by trolley
                            line to front line. Disposition:
                            A Coy. on right. D Coy. on left.
                            C Coy. in support about N.11.a.2.6.
                            B Coy. in reserve, and H.Q. about
                            N.11.a.5.2. O.R. killed 3, wounded 1.

 April 23--   do.           The 15th Division attacked the
                            enemy, their objective being the
                            Blue Line Bridge at O.14 Central
                            to O.8 Central to small wood in
                            O.8.B.1.2.

                            At zero hour 4.45 a.m., under
                            an intense barrage, the Battalion
                            attacked the front line trench.
                            At Bullet trench we captured
                            about 40 prisoners and a machine
                            gun at N.18.b.9.8. Finding ourselves
                            out of touch, we dug ourselves
                            in. At 5.45 a.m. the centre
                            of the Battalion moved up, fortifying
                            a post about the sunken Road
                           (N.18.b.9.5.)

                            At 10.30 a.m. the trench up to
                            the Cambrai Road was cleared.
                            At mid-day, under a new barrage,
                            we  were enabled to push forward,
                            forming a new post about N.13.a.2.6,
                            probably part of Hammer trench.
                            At 6 p.m. the 46th Brigade advanced
                            through us, enabling our Lewis
                            Guns to do good work as the
                            Germans retired from the trenches.

 April 24--Arras Front      At 2 a.m. after reorganisation the
           Line             Battalion moved back to behind
                            the Brown line, N.15.b. Central,
                            the 44th Brigade becoming supports.

 April 25--   do.           Battalion relieved the 10th Scottish
                            Rifles in front line from Cambrai
                            Road to about 300 yards south,
                            the Coys. from left to right
                            being C, D, B and A Coys.

 April 26--   do.           At 10.30 a.m. the 44th Brigade
                            advanced to the attack, one
                            objective being Cavalry Farm and
                            the German trenches to the east
                            of it. The advance was made in
                            2 waves, A and B in first wave,
                            and C and D Coys. in second wave,
                            20 yards between waves. The
                            advance reached the farm without
                            much difficulty, where they found
                            the trench very strongly held, and
                            at the same time a machine gun
                            opened fire on the left, coming
                            from the trenches which the 46th
                            Brigade had failed to capture.
                            The Battalion was forced to withdraw,
                            leaving a strong point on the
                            German line and another small
                            post to the east of the farm.
                            The remainder withdrew to our
                            original position.

 April 27--   do.           About 2 a.m. orders were received
                            to try and reorganise the attack.
                            This idea was given up when it
                            was learnt that the 46th Brigade
                            on our left had failed to attain
                            their objective. Officers and
                            patrols were sent out to try and
                            establish posts to link up with the
                            Black Watch, who had advanced
                            and made posts. This endeavour
                            failed. At 10.30 p.m. the Battalion
                            was relieved by the Seaforths
                            moving into support in the O.B.
                            trenches and Shovel trench.

 April 28--   do.           Support line. The Battalion was
                            relieved from the support line by
                            the A Coy. of the 3rd London
                            Regiment at 9.30 p.m. Casualties:--13
                            officers and 570 men went into
                            action; 6 officers and 191 men
                            returned; the total casualties
                            being 7 officers and 369 men,
                            of these 64 n.c.o.'s and men
                            were killed.

 April 29--Simincourt       In rest. Battalion moved from
                            Arras to Simincourt at 2.45 p.m.,
                            via Rue St. Aubert, L.29.d.
                            Danville, L.34.c. Bernville.

 April 30--   do.           In rest cleaning up, etc.

 May 1--   do.              In rest. Training under Coy.
  to                        arrangements. Casualties in
 May 7--                    operations 23rd to 28th April.
                            Killed, 4 officers and 78 O.R.
                            Wounded, 249 O.R. Missing 42 O.R.
                            Died of wounds, 3 O.R.

 May 8--Grand Rullecourt    In rest. Battalion moved to
                            billets in Grand Rullecourt at
                            8.20 a.m.

 May 21--Vacqueril          The 15th Division was transferred
         le Boucq           to the XIX. Corps. Battalion
                            moved to Vacqueril at 5.45 a.m.

 May 22--St. Georges        Moved to St. Georges at 7.30 a.m.
                            via Conchy and Wail. Battalion
                            training.

 June 21--Croix             Moved at 3.15 a.m. to Croix with
                            1 Coy. at Siracourt. Route: Willeman,
                            Oeuf, Siracourt.

 June 22--Pernes            Moved to Pernes at 3.15 a.m.
                            St. Pol-Pernes Road.

 June 23--Bourecq           Moved to Bourecq. C and D Coy.
                            with A and B Coys. at Ecquedeque
                            at 9.20 a.m.

 June 24--   do.            Major General H. F. Thullier,
                            C. B., C.M.G., assumed command
                            of the 15th Division (17/6/17).

 June 26--Steenbecque       Moved to Steenbecque at 7 a.m.

 June 26--St. Sylvestre     Moved to billeting area, S.E. of
          Cappel            St. Sylvestre Cappel at 4.20 a.m.

 June 27--Vlamertinghe      Moved into 9th Army area camp
                            about 2 miles S.W. of Vlamertinghe
                            at 3.15 a.m.

 July 1--Vlamertinghe       In reserve.
         Eerie Camp

 July 2--East of            Battalion moved into Brigade
         Ypres-Menin Road   support as follows:--C Coy. Half
                            Moon trench. D and B Coys. in
                            the Ecole. A Coy. in the Convent.
                            H.Q. in the Menin Road (19.d.05.45).
                            Battalion went into line 600
                            strong with 1 Coy. Commander
                            and 3 officers per Coy.

 July 3/4--  do.            In support. Finding working
                            parties. O.R. killed 2, wounded 8.

 July 5--Front Line         Battalion relieved the 9th Black
         Dragoon Farm       Watch in the left sub-section
                            right sector. Disposition: C Coy.
                            in front line (left). B Coy. in
                            front line (right). A Coy. in St.
                            James' trench. D Coy. Millcotts
                            (1 platoon). Potiize defences
                            (1 platoon), Potiize Road (2
                            platoons). H.Q. at Dragoon Farm.
                            Finding working parties. Casualties:
                            Wounded, 2 officers and 8 O.R.

 July 8--   do.             Front line. Patrols. A patrol
                            of 1 officer and 10 O.R. proceeded
                            at night across No Man's Land
                            to the Stables. No enemy encountered.
                            Casualties: Killed 7 O.R., wounded
                            11 O.R.

 July 9--Vlamertinghe       In reserve. Battalion relieved by
                            13th Royal Scots. Relief platoons
                            proceeded independently to Eerie
                            Camp. Casualties: O.R. 1 killed
                            and 2 wounded.

 July 10--Rubrouck          Battalion marched to Popperinghe,
          Training          trained to Arneke, marched to Le
          Area              Cloche. Transport by road.

 July 17--Winnezelle        In rest. Battalion moved by
          Billeting Area    route march to Winnezelle area,
                            under orders of 46th Infantry
                            Brigade at 7.30 a.m. Route: Esquelbecq,
                            Wormhoudt, to billets half a
                            mile north of L in Lodgehoek.

 July 18--Toronto Camp      In reserve. Battalion moved at
          Brandhoek.        12.30 a.m. to Toronto Camp by
                            route march via Winezeele, Droglanet,
                            Watou, Popperinghe.

 July 21--Camp at           In support. Battalion moved into
          H.16.a.5.8.       support camp at H.16.a.5.8., relieving
                            8th Seaforths. O.R. 1 killed.

 July 23--Front Line        Front line. Battalion relieved
          Railway. Dugout   8th Seaforths in the right sub-section
          at Southlane      I Sector. Disposition: A Coy.
                            in right front. D Coy. in left.
                            B Coy. in support (Half Moon).
                            C Coy. in reserve (Ecole). H.Q.
                            at Dugout under Railway at South
                            Lane. Strength of Battalion
                            going into trenches: 15 officers,
                            342 O.R.'s.

 July 24--   do.            A raid on enemy's trenches by one
                            officer and 12 O.R. captured 1
                            prisoner and a machine gun. The
                            party had one man slightly wounded.
                            Casualties: Wounded in action
                            (2 gassed), 8 O.R., missing
                            1 O.R.

 July 25--   do.            No Man's Land was patrolled.
                            Casualties: Wounded (1 gassed)
                            11 O.R., killed 10 O.R.

 July 28--   do.            A raid was carried out upon the
                            enemy's front line trenches by
                            D Coy. and 3 platoons from A
                            Coy. at 7 p.m. under an intense
                            barrage. Simultaneous with this
                            raid another party of 1 officer
                            and 14 O.R. proceeded from the
                            right of our line in search
                            of suspected M/G. This party
                            bombed Culvert and Dugout (where
                            the suspected machine gun was).
                            Both parties returned
                            about 7.30 p.m., having inflicted
                            many casualties and taken prisoner
                            1 officer and 39 O.R. with 1 machine
                            gun. Our casualties were slight,
                            being: Killed 1 O.R., missing
                            2 O.R., wounded 1 officer and
                            6 O.R.

 July 29--H.16.d.5.8.       At 9 p.m. the Battalion
                            was relieved by the 8/10th Gordons
                            and returned to camp at H.16.d.5.8.
                            Casualties: Killed 2 O.R., missing
                            2 O.R., wounded 2 officers and
                            17 O.R., died of wounds 1 officer.

 July 30--   do.            In reserve. Battalion marched
                            to position of assembly of attack,
                            being 20 officers and 588 men
                            strong. The Battalion was in
                            reserve to the 44th Infantry Brigade.
                            Disposition: A Coy. 2 platoons
                            "A.R.A." Dump, 30 men "A.R.B."
                            Dump (Thatch Barn), 30 men Half
                            Moon trench, B Coy. St. James
                            trench, C Coy. in Half Moon
                            trench Right of West Lane, D Coy.
                            Hedge trench south of West Lane.
                            H.Q. I.10.d.5.5. (South Lane).
                            Route to trenches via "F" Track.

 July 31--I.10.d.5.15.      Brigade reserve. Zero hour 3.50
                            a.m. Shortly after zero hour
                            Thatch Barn dump (A.R.B.) was
                            blown up, inflicting considerable
                            casualties to one platoon. This
                            necessitated platoon detailed for
                            A.R.A. Dump carrying forward to
                            A.R.C. Dump. Heavy casualties
                            among carrying parties. At 10
                            a.m. Battalion less A Coy. moved
                            forward into German front system
                            and came under heavy shell fire.
                            At 1 p.m. H.Q. went forward to
                            German reserve line. At 2 p.m.
                            one platoon went forward to construct
                            a strong point on Black Line
                            under R.E. officer, but owing
                            to heavy shelling it had to retire.
                            One Coy. went forward into Blue
                            Line, constructing and occupying
                            5 strong points.

 Aug. 1--German Reserve     At 5 a.m. the Battalion moved
         Line               forward as Battalions in support.
                            Disposition: 2 Coys. in trench
                            immediately behind North Station
                            Buildings, 1 Coy. in strong point
                            in Blue Line. The enemy counter-attacked
                            the right front of the Brigade,
                            but they were driven back, 4
                            men being taken prisoner and
                            many killed. We occupied the
                            original front line. Relieved
                            8/10th Gordons in front line.

 Aug. 3--Camp H.16.         Battalion was relieved by two
                            Coys. of the Munster Regiment
                            and went back into camp. Casualties
                            during operations: Officers,
                            6 killed, 1 died of wounds. O.R.'s
                            12 killed, 205 wounded, 23 missing
                            believed killed. 17 missing believed
                            wounded, 23 missing unknown,
                            5 died of wounds. Total: 7 officers,
                            285 O.R.'s.

 Aug. 4--Winnezelle         The 44th Brigade moved to Winnezelle
                            No. L 2 area by bus and billeted
                            in tents.

 Aug. 8--  do.              Battalion was inspected by G.O.C.
                            15th Division at 9.30 a.m.

 Aug. 17--Brandhoek Camp    In camp. Moved to Brandhoek
                            area No. L.3; route: Watou, St.
                            Janister, Biezen Switch Road.
                            March off 12.15 p.m.

 Aug. 19--   do.            Battalion proceeded to training
                            area, 17, 18, 23 and 24. Practising
                            attack. At 5.30 p.m. Battalion
                            moved to Bivouac Camp, H.17.A.1.9.

 Aug. 20--Bivouac Camp      The 15th Division was ordered to
                            continue the offensive on "2" day.
                            At 6.30 p.m. the Battalion moved
                            to relieve the 8th Battalion
                            Worcester Regiment at Pommern
                            Redoubt on the night of the
                            20/21st. After completion of
                            relief disposition of Battalion was
                            as follows: 2 platoons "A" Coy.
                            and 2 platoons "B" Coy. in
                            Pommern Redoubt; 2 platoons
                            "A" Coy. and 2 platoons "B" Coy.,
                            and "C" and "D" Coys. in shell
                            holes in neighbourhood of C.30.a.
                            and C.29.b. H.Q. in Pommern
                            Redoubt.

 Aug. 21/22--Pommern        At zero hour 4.45 a.m. on the
             Castle         22nd, disposition of Battalion
                            was: A Coy. on right front; B
                            Coy. left front; C Coy. right and
                            support; D Coy. left and support.
                            The attack was launched and
                            the Battalion advanced to a
                            line about 200 west of Hill 35,
                            where it was held up owing to
                            heavy fire. Further advance was
                            impossible. On the night of the
                            22nd/23rd August, Battalion was
                            relieved by the 9th Black Watch.

 Aug. 23--Rupprecht Farm    After relief Battalion proceeded
                            to Rupprecht Farm.

 Aug. 23/24--Eerie Camp     Battalion relieved by 8/10th
                            Gordons and proceeded to Eerie
                            Camp, reaching it about 6 a.m.

 Aug. 25--   do.            Casualties 20th to 24th August:
                            Killed 4 officers, 30 O.R.; wounded
                            5 officers, 132 O.R.

 Aug. 30--No. 2 Area        Battalion moved to Watou No. 2
          Watou             training area at 2.30 p.m.

 Sept. 1--   do.            The 44th Infantry Brigade marched
                            to and entrained at 8 a.m. at
                            Caestre, and detrained at Arras
                            at 9 p.m., marching back from
                            Arras to billets at Montenescourt,
                            arriving about 1 a.m. (2/9/17).

 Sept.  --Montennescourt    In rest. Company training.

 Sept. 7--Blanchy Park      Battalion moved at 3.45 p.m.
                            Route: L.2.C.2.4. St. Pol, Arras
                            Road, St. Nickolas, and relieved
                            the 10/11th H.L.I., 46th Brigade
                            at Blanchy Park (G.24.b.3.6.).
                            In reserve. Training.

 Sept. 14--Left Sector      Battalion relieved the 11th A. and
           Trenches         S.H. 45th Brigade on the left
                            sector of the Division, right
                            sector Brigade front, finding
                            isolated post J.25.b.10.25. C Coy.
                            front line and scabbard support.
                            D Coy., 2 platoons left front, 1
                            platoon scabbard support and 1
                            platoon Welford trench. B and
                            A Coys. right and left reserves in
                            Lancer Avenue. H.Q. in Johnstone
                            Avenue about H.30.d.1.4.

 Sept. 18--   do.           B and A relieved C and D respectively.
                            Casualties: O.R., 4 killed, 6 wounded.

 Sept. 23--Middlesex Camp   Battalion relieved on the night
                            22nd/23rd by the 8th Seaforths
                            and proceeded to Middlesex Camp
                            at G.17d.80.95 near Arras. Battalion
                            was in Brigade reserve. Company
                            training and working parties.

 Oct. 1--Barossa Camp       Battalion was relieved by the
                            10th Scottish Rifles, 46th Brigade,
                            and moved into Barossa Camp at
                            2 p.m. Company training and
                            working parties.

 Oct. 2/9--Monchy Trenches  Battalion relieved 13th Royal
                            Scots, right Sector, Monchy.
                            Disposition: D Coy. on right front,
                            C Coy. on left front, B Coy. in
                            support and A Coy. in reserve.

 Oct. 13--   do.            A Coy. relieved C Coy., B Coy.
                            D Coy. C Coy. moved on relief
                            into Happy Valley. D Coy. moved
                            into support in Musket Reserve
                            and Curb Switch.

 Oct. 14--   do.            In conjunction with a raid by the
                            Division on our right, Battalion
                            sent out two patrols each consisting
                            of one officer and 4 O.R. Of
                            No. 1 patrol only one man returned.
                            No. 2 patrol was seen to enter
                            enemy trench but never returned.
                            Killed 1 officer, missing 1
                            officer and 7 O.R.

 Oct. 17--Rifle Camp        Relieved by 8th Seaforths and
                            proceeding to Rifle Camp. Casualties:
                            4 O.R. killed, 6 wounded.

 Oct. 21--   do.            Battalion relieved 8/10th Gordons
                            in support. B and A Coys. Johnstone
                            Avenue, C and D Companies Rifle Camp.

 Oct. 25--Arras             Battalion (less A Coy.) relieved by
                            12th H.L.I. 46th Brigade. A Coy.
                            relieved by B Coy. 10th Scottish
                            Rifles. Battalion proceeded to
                            Oil Works, Arras.

 Nov. 2--Front Line         The 44th Infantry Brigade relieved
                            the 45th Infantry Brigade, left
                            sector Divisional front. Battalion
                            relieved one Company of 6/7th R.S.F.
                            and three Companies of 11th A. and S.H.
                            Disposition: D Coy. right front,
                            C Coy. left front, B Coy. support,
                            A Coy. reserve.

 Nov. 7--   do.             B and A Coys. relieved C and D
                            Coys.

 Nov. 10--Rifle Camp        Battalion relieved by 8th Seaforths
                            and proceeded to Rifle Camp.
                            O.R. 2 wounded. In Brigade reserve.

 Nov. 14--Stirling Camp     Relieved the 8/10th Gordons as
                            support Battalion. A Coy. in
                            Railway Cutting. C Coy. in
                            Embankment at Brigade H.Q. B Coy.
                            in Lancer Lane finding K.L.M.
                            posts. D Coy. in Stirling Camp.

 Nov. 18--Oil Works         Battalion in support to 44th
                            Brigade. Relieved by 12th H.L.I.
                            and proceeded to Oil Factory,
                            Place St. Croix, Arras.

 Nov. 26--Wilderness Camp   Relieved 6/7th R.S.F. at Wilderness
                            Camp in reserve.

 Nov. 28--Oil Works         Relieved by 1st Battalion Lancashire
                            Regiment and proceeded
                            to Oil Works at Arras.

 Dec. 1--Trenches           Battalion relieved 13th Royal
                            Scots in the left Div. Sect., front
                            line. Disposition: A Coy. on
                            right front, C Coy. on left front,
                            D Coy. in reserve. H.Q. in Candix
                            reserve (H.12.d.75.13).

 Dec. 8--In the Trenches    Inter Coy. Relief C Coy., relieved
                            A Coy., and D Coy. B Coy.

 Dec. 13--   do.            Relieved by 8/10th Gordons, Battalion
                            becoming support Battalion H.Q.
                            at H.11.c.7.9.

 Dec. 17--Ecole, Arras      The 46th Inf. Bde. relieved the
                            44th Inf. Bde. Battalion was
                            relieved by the 10th Scottish
                            Rifles and proceeded to the
                            Ecole des Jeunes Filles at Arras.
                            Companies occupied the Moat
                            Range for rifle practice and
                            Butte-de-Tir.

 Dec. 23--Pudding Trench    Battalion relieved the 11th A.
                            and S.H. in Brigade Reserve in
                            and about Corps Line. H.Q. in
                            Pudding trench (H.16.C.7.5.).

 Dec. 27--Trenches          Relieved the 8th Seaforths. B
                            Coy. on right front, C Coy. in
                            centre, D Coy. on left front, A Coy.
                            in support at Welford Reserve.


1918.

 Jan. 2--Ecole, Arras       The 44th Inf. Bde. was relieved
                            by the 2nd Guards Bde. Battalion
                            was relieved by the 3rd Grenadiers
                            and proceeded into billets at
                            Ecole des Jeunes Filles at Arras,

 Feb. 5--Trenches           Relieved 1st Duke of Wellingtons
                            and part of 2nd Battalion Essex
                            Regiment. Front line.

 Feb. 8--Bois des Boeufs    Re-adjustment of Brigade Front
         Camp               on night of 8/9th Feb. A Coy.
                            relieved by D Coy. 8th Seaforths;
                            B Coy. relieved by C Coy., 11th
                            A. and S. H. C Coy. relieved by
                            1 platoon 13th Royal Scots; D
                            Coy. relieved by 2 platoons 11th
                            A and S. H., B and C Coys. 8th
                            Seaforths. On relief, Battalion
                            became reserve Battalion in Bois
                            de Boeufs Camp.

 Feb. 11--Trenches          Battalion in support relieving
                            8/10th Gordons. Disposition: D
                            Coy. 3 pn. Fosse Farm, 1 pn. Brown
                            Line. C Coy. B.C.D. and E. Strong
                            Points. B Coy. and H.Q Fosse
                            Caves. A Coy. Brown line.

 Feb. 17--Front Line        Relieved 8/10th Gordons. A Coy.
                            3 pn. Fork Reserve, 1 Pn. Saddle
                            support, C.H.Q. Pick Caves. B
                            Coy. 3 Pn. Spade Reserve. 1 Pn.
                            Hoe trench, C.H.Q. Spade. C Coy.
                            3 Pn. left front line, 1 Pn. support,
                            C.H.Q. Saddle support, D Coy.
                            3 Pn. right front, 1 Pn. support,
                            C.H.Q. Saddle support.

 Feb. 20--Front Line        Inter Coy. relief. A Coy. relieved
                            C Coy., B Coy. relieved D Coy.

 Feb. 23--   do.            1 officer and 28 O.R. raided the
                            enemy's trenches at 3.30 a.m.
                            There were no Germans in the
                            trenches, although 4 were found in
                            a saphead. 1 was killed and 3
                            made prisoners. Our casualties,
                            nil.

 Feb. 23/24--Bois des       Relieved by 8th Seaforths and
             Boeufs         became reserve Battalion. O.R.
                            2 wounded.

 March 1--   do.            Battalion relieved the 8/10th
                            Gordons, becoming support Battalion
                            in Les Fosse Farm. A Coy.
                            B.C.D. and E. strong points.
                            B Coy. 3 Pn. Fosse Farm, 1 Pn.
                            Brown Line. C and D Coys. Brown
                            Line.

 Mar. 7--Front Line         Relieved in support by the 8th
                            Seaforths, and on relief relieved
                            the 8/10th Gordons in the front
                            area. Disposition: A Coy. in
                            left support, B Coy. in right
                            support, C Coy. left front, D Coy.
                            right front.

 Mar. 10--   do.            Inter Coy. relief. A and B Coys.
                            relieved C and D Coys. O.R. 17
                            wounded.

 Mar. 13--Reserve Line      Relieved 8th Seaforths, becoming
                            reserve Battalion.

 Mar. 19--In Support        Relieved 8/10th Gordons in support
                            Battalion. A Coy. N.12.c. B Coy.
                            2 pn. N.12.c., 2 pn. North of
                            Fosse Cave. C Coy. strong points
                            B.C.D. and E. D Coy. 3 pn. Apple
                            and Pear trench, 1 pn. Gordon
                            Avenue. H.Q. Les Fosses Farm.

 Mar. 22/23--   do.         Battalion ordered to withdraw
                            to the Army Line in N.7.a. and b.

 Mar. 23--   do.            Battalion moved forward to support
                            the 8th Seaforths with their
                            right on N.8.c.8.0, and their left
                            on the Brown Line. This line
                            was held with 2 Coys. in front and
                            2 Coys. in support. H.Q. at
                            Shamrock Corner.

 Mar. 25--Front Line        Relieved by 8/10th Gordons. Moved
                            forward and relieved 8th Seaforths
                            in the front line. Disposition:
                            A Coy. left front, D Coy. left
                            support, B Coy. right support,
                            C Coy. right front, H.Q. in
                            N.9.C.8.5.

 Mar. 27--   do.            Inter Coy. relief. D Coy. relieved
                            A Coy., B Coy. relieved C Coy.

 Mar. 28--   do.            About 3 a.m. the enemy started
                            a heavy bombardment. About 7 a.m.
                            enemy infantry attacked and
                            gained a footing in the forward
                            trench and commenced to work
                            round our left in considerable
                            numbers. To avoid being cut
                            off D and B Coys. retired to rear
                            of Brown Line, here holding the
                            enemy attack until 1 p.m. About
                            3 p.m. the line was withdrawn to
                            the Army Line in front of Tilloy.
                            About midnight Battalion withdrawn
                            from action and proceeded via
                            Arras, Dainville to Wanquetin.

 Mar. 28--Wanquetin         Casualties sustained during battle:
                            Officers--Killed, 4; wounded 3;
                            missing 4; wounded and missing
                            4; wounded (believed P. of W.) 1.
                            Other Ranks--Killed 1; wounded
                            72; wounded (believed P. of W.)
                            22; wounded and missing 28; missing
                            (believed killed) 6; missing
                            (believed P. of W.) 28; missing
                            213. Total--16 officers; 372
                            other ranks.

 Mar. 30--Arras             Battalion proceeded to Arras and
                            were billetted in Petite Place.

 Mar. 31--   do.            44th Infantry Brigade relieved
                            45th Infantry Brigade in the line
                            near Tilloy. Battalion being in
                            reserve. Formed into 2 double
                            Coys.

 April 1--Army Line         One Coy. of the 9th Gordons was
                            attached to the Battalion, which
                            occupied the old trenches in rear
                            of the intermediate Army line
                            with H.Q. at 9.35.D.15.90.

 April 4--Arras             Relieved by 13th Royal Scots and
                            proceeded to billets in Petite
                            Place, Arras.

 April 9--In the Trenches   Relieved 13th Royal Scots in
                            reserve. B and D Coys. occupied
                            the tunnel and A and B Coys. the
                            large dug-out at 19.5.6.3.7.

 April 13--Arras            Battalion was relieved by the 6th
                            Camerons 45th Brigade, and proceeded
                            to Petite Place, Arras, where
                            work parties were found. O.R.'s,
                            7 wounded.

 April 18--In the Trenches  Relieved the 8/10th Gordons at
                            9 a.m.

 April 20--   do.           Battalion relieved the 6th Camerons
                            in support. Disposition: A Coy.
                            in London Avenue and Inverness
                            Terrace (H.25.d.). B Coy. in
                            Blangy Front and support lines
                            between Pelves Lane and Cambrai
                            Road inclusive. C Coy. 2 platoons
                            in Tilloy Reserve (H.31.b.),
                            1 platoon St. Patrick's Road
                            (H.31.a. central) 1 platoon
                            with Coy. H.Q. at Devil's Wood.
                            D Coy. in Blancy Front. H.Q.
                            Imperial Cave.

 April 23/24--Berneville    The 44th Infantry Brigade was
                            relieved by the 167th Brigade.
                            Battalion was relieved by the
                            8th Middlesex Regiment and proceeded
                            to Berneville via Dainville
                            and Warlus.

 April 24--   do.           In camp.

 April 25--Auchel           Battalion moved by bus to Camblain
                            Chatelain and Auchel at 7.20 a.m.,
                            reaching Auchel about 1 p.m.
                            Transport by road independently.

 May 4--Y Huts, Etrun       The 44th Brigade moved to the
                            XVII. Corps area 8.30 a.m. Marched
                            to Calonne-Ricourt, entrained
                            to Acq, march to Etrun.

 May 6--   do.              Brigade moved to support area.
                            Disposition of Battalion: H.Q.
                            Portsmouth Camp G.3.b.9.2. B
                            and C Coys. in Colinwood Camp
                            G.3.b.6.6. D Coy. Cinema Hut
                            G.3.b.8.3. A Coy. Trafalgar
                            Camp G.3.d.7.4.

 May 10/11--In the Trenches Relieved 10th Scottish Rifles in
                            Right Sector, Left Sub Section
                            H.Q. at H.16.d.1.8.

 May 13/14--   do.          Battalion took over area held by
                            6th Camerons as far north as
                            H.17.b.35.60. Disposition: A
                            Coy. from H.17.d.0.8. to H.17.c.35.60
                            (3 platoons), 1 platoon in Cam.
                            Avenue from H.17.c.10.70. B
                            Coy. as at present. Coy. H.Q.
                            H.16.d.5.2. C Coy. in front line
                            from H.17.d.10.60 to H.23.a.30.90
                            (3 platoons). 1 platoon in a
                            cellar at H.17.c.45.35. D Coy. in
                            Pudding Trench (as far north as
                            H.16.c.79.60).

 May 14/15--   do.          Inter Coy. relief. D Coy. relieved
                            A Coy.

 May 17--In Support Area    Relieved by 8/10th Gordons. Took
                            over accommodation in Stirling
                            Camp. A and C Coys. with H.Q.
                            at Stirling Camp. B Coy. in
                            Cam. Valley. D Coy. in cellars,
                            and old gun pits Athies. O.R.,
                            3 wounded.

 May 20--   do.             2 Camerons escaped from German
                            Internment Camp and came through
                            British lines.

 May 24--Roclincourt        Relieved by 13th Royal Scots
                            going into Divisional reserve at
                            Roclincourt Area. B and C Coy.
                            Collingwood Camp. A Coy. Trafalgar
                            Camp. B Coy. Cinema Hut.
                            H.Q. Portsmouth Camp.

 June 1/2--In the Trenches  Relieved the 10th Scottish Rifles
                            in left front line. Officers, 3
                            wounded: O.R.'s, 16 wounded,
                            4 killed.

 June 6/7th--Arras          Relieved by 4/5th Black Watch.
                            Battalion withdrew to Petite
                            Place, Arras. H.Q. at Rue des
                            Trois Visages.

 June 10--  do.             The 7th Camerons were amalgamated
                            with the 6th Camerons, Lieut.-Col.
                            N. Macleod, D.S.O., to command
                            the new Battalion. 21 officers
                            and 383 O.R.'s were absorbed
                            in the 6th Camerons. 9 officers
                            and 466 O.R.'s were transferred
                            to the Base M (S) Depot.

 June 10--Lens Mardeuil     Formed into a Cadre Battalion
                            for the purpose of training American
                            Battalions. Establishment: 10
                            officers and 60 O.R.'s. Designation:
                            7th Battalion Queen's Own Cameron
                            Highlanders Training Staff 118th
                            Infantry Brigade. 39th Division B.E.F.

                            Entrained at Mardeuil at 10 a.m.
                            and proceeded to Barlin
                            for Audruicq Hazelbrouck.

 June 11--Hazelbrouck       Arrived Hazelbrouck at 6 p.m.
                            (Ardruicq at 4 p.m.) Billeted
                            there for night.

 June 12--Calais            Left Nortkerque-Hazelbrouck at
                            9 a.m. and marched to Rodelinghem,
                            Calais, arriving 11 a.m.

 June 17--   do.            Left Rodelinghem for camp at
                            Calais 13.3F.86.75, arriving at
                            11 a.m. Affiliated to 3rd Battalion
                            119th Regiment A.E.F. Started
                            training.

 June 21--   do.            Lieut.-Col. F. Anderson, M.C.,
                            late C.O. of the 6th Camerons,
                            joined as C.O. of this Staff.

 June 22--   do.            Training Americans.

 July 1--   do.             General Pershing inspects 119th
                            Regiment at training.

 July 2--   do.             American Division leaves area.
                            Moved camp to a field in Veuse
                            Village.

 July 26--Listergaux        Left Listergaux at 3.30 p.m. for
                            VII. Corps Reinforcement Camp
                            Watten by march, arriving about
                            7 p.m.

 July 29--Watten            Received orders to receive 823
                            O.R. arriving Watten 30/7/28.

 July 30--Arneke            Left Watten at 12.30 p.m., arriving
                            Arneke about 4 p.m. In billets
                            about 8.30 p.m. Battalion made
                            up of Black Watch, Seaforths and
                            Gordons. Dropped 350 O.R. at
                            Cassell to join A. and S. H. Our
                            Battalion are reinforcements for
                            51st Division to be called XIX.
                            Corps Reinforcement.

 July 31--   do.            Left Arneke and marched via
                            Cassel to a staging camp in St.
                            Eloy Area, Hazelbrouck. Map
                            3 H. 30.85.

 Aug. 1--   do.             A and D Coys. left camp at 1 p.m.
                            and marched to L.33.C. area where
                            they billetted. H.Q., B and C
                            Coys. marched to 28 A.24.c.6.6,
                            arriving at 10 p.m.

 Aug. 2--St. Eloy Area      Moved back to old Chinese camp
                            at Sheet 28.G.14.A.05.70.

 Aug. 3--   do.             Found working parties.

 Aug. 6--   do.             310 O.R.'s conducted by officers
                            left for 51st Division.

 Aug. 7--   do.             248 O.R. conducted by 6 officers
                            left for 51st Division. Remainder
                            of reinforcements entrained at
                            Remy Siding for La Cloche, reaching
                            there at 8.30 p.m.

 Aug. 8--La Cloche          Cleaning up.

 Aug. 10--   do.            7 officers and 71 O.R. leave for
                            51st Division, only 7th Camerons
                            now left.

 Aug. 13--   do.            Leave La Cloche and march to
                            Esquebecq, entraining there at
                            8.30 a.m. for Audruicq. Embus
                            at Audruicq for Listergaux, arriving
                            about midday. Received orders
                            that the 7th Camerons are to break
                            up and proceed to the 6th Battalion.
                            Lieut.-Col. F. Anderson to command
                            8th Seaforths.

 Aug. 14--Listergaux        Marched from Listergaux to Audruicq
                            and entrain at 11.30 a.m. for
                            15th Division via Etaples.


[Illustration]


 JAMIESON & MUNRO, LTD., PRINTERS.
 40 CRAIGS, STIRLING.




"THE 7TH CAMERONS ON HILL 70."


The frontispiece to this volume is a reproduction of a painting by the
distinguished War Artist, Joseph Gray. It was commissioned by Evan M.
Barron, Esq., Inverness, as a Memorial to the Battalion of which his
brother, Major James Barron, was second-in-command when he fell at the
Battle of Loos, on 25th September, 1915. The incident depicted by the
artist is thus described by Mr. John Buchan in _Nelson's History of
the War_:--

 "Lieutenant-Colonel Sandilands of the 7th Camerons arrived on the
 Hill. Being the Senior Officer present, he took command and planted
 the headquarters' flag of his Battalion on the top. It was his
 business to recall the van of the advance, now lost in the fog and
 smoke of the eastern slopes, and to entrench himself on the summit.
 The Redoubt was now out of our hands, and the line taken ran just
 under the crest on the west, and was continued north of Loos by the
 46th Brigade. To retire the van was no light task. Two officers,
 whose names deserve to be remembered, Major Crichton of the 10th
 Gordons, and Major Barron of the 7th Camerons, volunteered for the
 desperate mission. They fell in the task, but the order reached the
 stragglers, and they began to fight their way back. In the midst of
 encircling fire it was a forlorn hope, and few returned to the
 British lines on the Hill. All down the slopes towards Lens lay the
 tartans, Gordon and Black Watch, Seaforth and Cameron, like the drift
 left on the shore when the tide has ebbed."

Reproductions of the picture, measuring 25 inches by 12 inches, are on
sale as follows:--Signed Artist's Proofs, £3 3s.; Ordinary Prints, £1
1s.; but purchasers of this volume may obtain

 Signed Artist's Proofs for £2 2s.,

on filling in name and address at foot of this page, and sending it,
along with a remittance, to

Messrs. ROBERT CARRUTHERS & SONS, "Courier" Office, INVERNESS.

_Name_  ..............................

_Address_ ............................

                 ..........................






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The History of the 7th Battalion The
Queen's Own Cameron Highlanders, by Col. J. W. Sandilands and Lt. Col. Norman Macleod

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HISTORY 7TH BATT. CAMERON HIGHLANDERS ***

***** This file should be named 50301-8.txt or 50301-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/0/3/0/50301/

Produced by Brian Coe, Chris Pinfield, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

